WebEx:
https://netacad.webex.com/netacad-sp/j.php?MTID=mddb439f4d34079318b64e6bfe4478258

Curso online:
https://www.netacad.com/en

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 1 Networking Today
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8/22/2023 14:25:07

1.0
Explain the advances in modern network technologies.
Install Cisco Packet Tracer.

1.1
"Communication is almost as important to us as our reliance on air, water, food,
and shelter".
bold claim.

1.2
Host can be called end devices, sometimes clients. 

An IP address identifies the host and the network to which the host is attached.

As mentioned before, clients are a type of host. Clients have software for
requesting and displaying the information obtained from the server. An example
of client software is a web browser, like Chrome or FireFox.

Peer-to-peer refers to a computer being server and client.

Advantages:
  - Easy to set up
  - Less complex
  - Lower cost because network devices and dedicated servers may no te be
    required
  - Can be used for simple tasks such as transferring files and sharing
    printers

Disadvantages:
  - No centralized administration
  - Not as secure
  - Not scalable
  - All devices may act as both clients and serves which slow performance

To distinguish one end device from another, each end device on a network has an
address.

Intermediary devices connect the individual end devices to the network.

Intermediary network devices perform some or all of these functions:
  - Regenerate and retransmit communication signals.
  - Maintain information about what pathways exist through the network and
    internetwork
  - Notify other devices of errors and communication failure
  - Classify and direct messages according to priorites
  - Permit or deny the flow of data, based on security settings

Modern networks primarily use three types of media to interconnect devices
  - Metal wires within cables - Electrical impulses
  - Glass or plastic fibers within cables (fiber-optic-cable) - Pulses of light
  - Wireless transmission - Modulation of specific frequencies of waves

The four main criteria for choosing network media are these:
  - What is the maximum distance that the media can successfully carry a
    signal?
  - What is the environment in which the media will be installed?
  - What is the amount of data and at what speed must it be transmitted?
  - What is the cost of the media and installation?

1.3

Diagrams of networks often use symbols to represent the different devices and
connections that make up a network. This type of “picture” of a network is known
as a topology diagram.

In addition to these representations, specialized terminology is used to
describe how each of these devices and media connect to each other:
  - Network Interface Card (NIC): A NIC physically connects the end device to
    the network. 
  - Physical Port: A connector or outlet on a networking device where the media
    connects to an end device or another networking device. 
  - Interface: Specialized ports on a networking device that connect to
    individual networks. Because routers connect networks, the ports on a router
    are referred to as network interfaces. 

The terms port and interface are often used interchangeably.

Topology diagrams are mandatory for anyone working with a network. There are two
types of topology diagrams: physical and logical.
  - Physical topology diagrams illustrate the physical location of intermediary
    devices and cable installation
  - Logical topology diagrams illustrate devices, ports, and the addressing
    scheme of the network

1.4

Networks range from simple networks consisting of two computers, to networks
connecting millions of devices.

Small office and home office (SOHO) networks allow people to work from home, or
a remote office.

The internet is the largest network in existence. In fact, the term internet
means a “network of networks”. It is a collection of interconnected private and
public networks.

Network infrastructures vary greatly in terms of:
  - Size of the area covered
  - Number of users connected
  - Number and types of services available
  - Area of responsibility

LANs -> Local Area Networks (department, home, small business)
WANs -> Wide Area Networks (managed by a larger corporation)

LANs have specific characteristics:
  - LANs interconnect end devices in a limited area such as a home, school,
    office building, or campus.
  - A LAN is usually administered by a single organization or individual.
    Administrative control is enforced at the network level and governs the
    security and access control policies.
  - LANs provide high-speed bandwidth to internal end devices and intermediary
    devices.

WANs have specific characteristics:
  - WANs interconnect LANs over wide geographical areas such as between cities,
    states, provinces, countries, or continents.
  - WANs are usually administered by multiple service providers.
  - WANs typically provide slower speed links between LANs.

The internet is not owned by any individual or group. Ensuring effective
communication across this diverse infrastructure requires the application of
consistent and commonly recognized technologies and standards as well as the
cooperation of many network administration agencies. There are organizations
that were developed to help maintain the structure and standardization of
internet protocols and processes. These organizations include the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF), Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN), and the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), plus many others.

An intranet is designed to be accessible only by the organization's members,
employees, or others with authorization.

An organization may use an extranet to provide secure and safe access to
individuals who work for a different organization but require access to the
organization’s data. Here are some examples of extranets:
  - A company that is providing access to outside suppliers and contractors
  - A hospital that is providing a booking system to doctors so they can make
    appointments for their patients
  - A local office of education that is providing budget and personnel
    information to the schools in its district

1.5

8/27/2023 21:22:49

ISP -> Internet Service Provider

Common connections for users:

Cable
  - DSL -> Digital Subscriber Lines
    - ADSL -> download speed faster than upload speed.
  - Cellular
  - Satellite
  - Dial-up telephone

Business Internet Connection
  - Dedicated Leased Line
  - Metro Ethernet
  - Business DSL
  - Satellite

Traditional Separate Networks -> Multiple services ran on multiple networks.
Converged Networks -> Carry multiple services on one network.

1.6
We have learned that there are four basic characteristics that network
architects must address to meet user expectations:
  - Fault Tolerance
      A fault tolerant network is one that limits the number of affected devices
      during a failure.
      
  - Scalability
      A scalable network expands quickly to support new users and applications.
      
  - Quality of Service (QoS)
      The type of traffic, not the content of the traffic, is what is important.
      
  - Security
      Network administrators must address two types of network security
      concerns: network infrastructure security and information security.
      Network administrators must also protect the information contained within
      the packets being transmitted over the network, and the information stored
      on network attached devices.
        - Confidentiality
        - Integrity
        - Availability

1.7

There are several networking trends that affect organizations and consumers:

  - Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
     enables end users the freedom to use personal tools to access information
     and communicate across a business or campus network. BYOD means any device,
     with any ownership, used anywhere.
     
  - Online collaboration
    Collaboration is a critical and strategic priority that organizations are
    using to remain competitive.
    
  - Video communications
    Video is becoming a critical requirement for effective collaboration as
    organizations extend across geographic and cultural boundaries.
  
  - Cloud Computing
    Cloud computing allows us to store personal files, even backup an entire
    drive on servers over the internet.
    Data centers are facilities used to house computer systems and associated
    components.

    There are four primary types of clouds:
    
      - Public clouds
          Available to the general population. Services may be free or are
          offered on a pay-per-use model.

      - Private clouds
          Intended for a specific organization or entity, such as a government.
          A private cloud can be set up using the organization’s private
          network.

      - Hybrid clouds
          A hybrid cloud is made up of two or more clouds

      - Community clouds
          A community cloud is created for exclusive use by specific entities or
          organizations.
  
Smart home technology integrates into every-day appliances, which can then
connect with other devices to make the appliances more ‘smart’ or automated.

Powerline networking for home networks uses existing electrical wiring to
connect devices

WISP -> Wireless Internet Service Provider. Common in rural environments.

Another wireless solution for the home and small businesses is wireless
broadband. This solution uses the same cellular technology as a smart phone.

1.8
8/30/2023 17:17:05

Network security must consider the environment, as well as the tools and
requirements of the network. It must be able to secure data while still
allowing for the quality of service that users expect of the network.

There are several common external threats to networks:
  - Viruses, worms, and Trojan horses: These contain malicious software or code
    running on a user device.

  - Spyware and adware: These are types of software which are installed on a
    user’s device. The software then secretly collects information about the
    user.

  - Zero-day attacks: Also called zero-hour attacks, these occur on the first
    day that a vulnerability becomes known.

  - Threat actor attacks: A malicious person attacks user devices or network
    resources.

  - Denial of service attacks: These attacks slow or crash applications and
    processes on a network device.

  - Data interception and theft: This attack captures private information from
    an organization’s network.

  - Identity theft: This attack steals the login credentials of a user in order
    to access private data.

With the evolving BYOD strategies, corporate data is much more vulnerable.
Therefore, when developing a security policy, it is important to address both
external and internal security threats.

These are the basic security components for a home or small office network:
  - Antivirus and antispyware - These applications help to protect end devices
    from becoming infected with malicious software.
    
  - Firewall filtering - Firewall filtering blocks unauthorized access into and
    out of the network. This may include a host-based firewall system that
    prevents unauthorized access to the end device, or a basic filtering service
    on the home router to prevent unauthorized access from the outside world
    into the network.

Larger networks and corporate networks use antivirus, antispyware, and firewall
filtering, but they also have other security requirements:
  - Dedicated firewall systems - These provide more advanced firewall
    capabilities that can filter large amounts of traffic with more granularity.

  - Access control lists (ACL) - These further filter access and traffic
    forwarding based on IP addresses and applications.

  - Intrusion prevention systems (IPS) - These identify fast-spreading threats,
    such as zero-day or zero-hour attacks.

  - Virtual private networks (VPN) - These provide secure access into an
    organization for remote workers.

The study of network security threats and mitigation techniques starts with a
clear understanding of the underlying switching and routing infrastructure used
to organize network services.

1.9
8/30/2023 20:59:04

A consolidated and updated CCNA for networking engineers is three courses and
one exam which covers the fundamental topics for all network technologies. The
new CCNA focuses on IP foundation and security topics along with wireless,
virtualization, automation, and network programmability.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 2 Basic Switch and End Device Configuration
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.0
8/31/2023 15:37:02

As part of your career in networking, you might have to set up a new network or
maintain and upgrade an existing one. In either case, you’ll configure switches
and end devices so that they are secure and perform effectively based on your
requirements.

2.1
All end devices and network devices require an operating system (OS). The
portion of the OS that interacts directly with computer hardware is known as the
kernel. The portion that interfaces with applications and the user is known as
the shell. The user can interact with the shell using a command-line interface
(CLI) or a graphical user interface (GUI).

  - Shell: The user interface that allows to request specific tasks from the
    computer. These requests can be made either through the CLI or GUI
    interfaces.
  - Kernel: Communicates between the hardware and software of a computer and
    manages how hardware resources are used to meet software requiremetns.
  - Hardware: The physical part of a computer including underlying
    electronics.

GUIs may not always be able to provide all the features available with the CLI.
GUIs can also fail. For these reasons, network devices are typically accessed
through a CLI. 

The family of network operating systems used on many Cisco devices is called the
Cisco Internetwork Operating System (IOS). *

Other Cisco operating systems include IOS XE, IOS XR, and NX-OS. *

The operating system on home routers is usually called firmware. The most common
method for configuring a home router is by using a web browser-based GUI.

A switch will forward traffic by default and does not need to be explicitly
configured to operate. Regardless of the default behavior of a new switch, all
switches should be configured and secured.

Ways to access a switch:
  - Console (No remote)
  - SSH (Is secure)
  - Telnet (is not secure)
  - Legacy auxiliary port for telephone connections (Some devices)

Terminal Emulation Programs
  - PuTTY
  - Tera Term
  - SecureCRT

2.2
9/1/2023 11:15:26

User EXEC Mode: 
Limited capabilities, but useful for basic operations. Also called "view-only"
mode.

Priviledged EXEC Mode: 
Allows access to all commands and features. 

Switch(config)# Configuration mode
Switch(config-line)# Line configuration mode
Switch(config-if)# Interface configuration mode

important commands:
  >enable
  #disable
  #configure terminal
  #(...)exit
  #line console 0 -> management interface console port
  #line vty 0 15 -> remote administrator access
  #interface vlan 1 -> vlan configuration
  #interface fastethernet 0/1 -> fast ethernet interface
  #(...)end -> Return to privileged EXEC mode
  #(...)<C-z> -> Return to privileged EXEC mode

2.3
9/1/2023 16:38:49

A network administrator must know the basic IOS command structure to be able to
use the CLI for device configuration.

Keyword is defined by the OS
Argument is a value or variable

To determine the keywords and arguments required for a command, refer to the
command syntax.

| Convention | Description      |
|:----------:|:----------------:|
| Boldface   | Keywords         |
| Italics    | Arguments        |
| [x]        | Optional element |
| {x}        | Required element |
| [x {y|z}]  | Required choice  |

The Cisco IOS Command Reference is the ultimate source of information for a
particular IOS command.

To access context-sensitive help, simply enter a question mark, ?, at the CLI.

If the interpreter cannot understand the command being entered, it will provide
feedback describing what is wrong with the command.

the configure command can be shortened to conf because configure is the only
command that begins with conf.

| Keystroke   | Description                                       |
|:-----------:|:--------------------------------------------------|
| Tab         | Partial command completion                        |
| Backspace   | Deletes character left the the cursor             |
| Ctrl+D      | Deletes character at the cursor                   |
| Ctrl+K      | Deletes from the cursor to the end                |
| Esc D       | Deletes from the cursor to the end of the word    |
| Ctrl+U      | Deletes back to the beginning of the command line |
| Ctrl+X      | Deletes back to the beginning of the command line |
| Ctrl+W      | Deletes word to the left of the cursor            |
| Ctrl+A      | Moves the cursor to the beginning of the line     |
| Left arrow  | Moves the cursor one character to the left        |
| Ctrl B      | Moves the cursor one character to the left        |
| Esc B       | Moves the cursor back one word to the left        |
| Esc F       | Moves the cursor forward one word to the right    |
| Right arrow | Moves the cursor one character to the right       |
| Ctrl+F      | Moves the cursor one character to the right       |
| Ctrl+E      | Moves the cursor to the end of command line       |
| Up arrow    | Previous command                                  |
| Ctrl-P      | Previous command                                  |
| Down arrow  | Next command                                      |
| Ctrl-N      | Next command                                      |
| Ctrl-R      | Redisplays system prompt                          |
| Ctrl-I      | Redisplays system prompt                          |
| Ctrl-L      | Redisplays system prompt                          |

“--More--”
  - Enter -> Displays the next line.
  - Space -> Displays the next screen
  - Any other key -> Ends the display string

Exit out of an operation
Ctrl - C -> Returns to privileged mode, in setup aborts
Ctrl - Z -> Returns ot privileged mode
Ctrl-Shift-6 -> All-purpose break sequence

2.4

Here are some important naming guidelines for hosts:
  - Start with a letter
  - Contain no spaces
  - End with a letter or digit
  - Use only letters, digits, and dashes
  - Be less than 64 characters in length

There are some key points to consider when choosing passwords:
  - Use passwords that are more than eight characters in length.
  - Use a combination of upper and lowercase letters, numbers, special
    characters, and/or numeric sequences.
  - Avoid using the same password for all devices.
  - Do not use common words because they are easily guessed.

To encrypt all plaintext passwords, use the service password-encryption

2.5

There are two system files that store the device configuration:

startup-config -> NVRAM -> show startup-config
running-config -> RAM -> show running-config

copy running-config startup-config -> Save configuration in NVRAM.

#dir nvram: -> Shows startup-config file

2.6

The use of IP addresses is the primary means of enabling devices to locate one
another and establish end-to-end communication on the internet.

An IPv4 subnet mask is a 32-bit value that differentiates the network portion of
the address from the host portion.

IPv6 addresses are not case-sensitive and can be written in either lowercase or
uppercase.

DHCP -> Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol

setup remote access for switch

#configure terminal
(config)#interface vlan 1
(config-if)# ip address [ip] [mask]
(config-if)# no shutdown
(config-if)# exit
(config)# ip default-gateway 192.168.1.1

#show ip interface brief -> List ip addresses.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 3 Protocols and Models
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9/3/2023 14:48:29

3.0
Models give you a way to visualize the rules and their place in your network.

3.1
Devices exist within their own bubble and are unaware of the network; protocols
handle the communication between them.

All communication methods have the following three elements in common:
  - Message (sender)
  - Message destination (receiver)
  - Channel

Protocols are communication rules.

Common computer protocols include the following requirements:
  - Message encoding
  - Message formatting and encapsulation
  - Message size
  - Message timing
  - Message delivery options

Encoding is the process of converting information into another acceptable form,
for transmission. Decoding reverses this process to interpret the information.

Message formats depend on the type of message and the channel that is used to
deliver the message.

Message formats depend on the type of message and the channel that is used to
deliver the message. A common example of requiring the correct format in human
communications is when sending a letter.

Another rule of communication is message size. When a long message is sent from
one host to another over a network, it is necessary to break the message into
smaller pieces.

Message timing includes the following:
  - Flow control: Managing the rate of data transmission.

  - Response Timeout: Protocols that specify how long to wait for responses and
    what actions to take if a response timeout occurs.

  - Access method: This determines when someone can send a message.

Three types of data communications include:
  - Unicast: Information is being transmitted to a single end device.
  - Multicast: Information is being transmitted to a one or more end devices.
  - Broadcast: Information is being transmitted to all end devices.

3.2

Protocols are implemented by end devices and intermediary devices in software,
hardware, or both.

Protocol types:
  - Network Communications Protocols: Protocols enable two or more devices to
    communicate over one or more networks. The Ethernet family of technologies
    involves a variety of protocols such as IP, Transmission Control Protocol
    (TCP), HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP), and many more.
    
  - Network Security Protocols: Protocols secure data to provide authentication,
    data integrity, and data encryption. Examples of secure protocols include
    Secure Shell (SSH), Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), and Transport Layer Security
    (TLS).

  - Routing Protocols: Protocols enable routers to exchange route information,
    compare path information, and then to select the best path to the
    destination network. Examples of routing protocols include Open Shortest
    Path First (OSPF) and Border Gateway Protocol (BGP).

  - Service Discovery Protocols: Protocols are used for the automatic detection
    of devices or services. Examples of service discovery protocols include
    Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) which discovers services for IP
    address allocation, and Domain Name System (DNS) which is used to perform
    name-to-IP address translation.

Function of Protocols:
  - Addressing: This identifies the sender and the intended receiver of the
    message using a defined addressing scheme. Examples of protocols that
    provide addressing include Ethernet, IPv4, and IPv6.

  - Reliability: This function provides guaranteed delivery mechanisms in case
    messages are lost or corrupted in transit. TCP provides guaranteed
    delivery.

  - Flow control: This function ensures that data flows at an efficient rate
    between two communicating devices. TCP provides flow control services.

  - Sequencing: This function uniquely labels each transmitted segment of
    data. The receiving device uses the sequencing information to reassemble the
    information correctly. This is useful if the data segments are lost, delayed
    or received out-of-order. TCP provides sequencing services.

  - Error detection: This function is used to determine if data became corrupted
    during transmission. Various protocols that provide error detection include
    Ethernet, IPv4, IPv6, and TCP.

  - Application Interface: This function contains information used for
    process-to-process communications between network applications. For example,
    when accessing a web page, HTTP or HTTPS protocols are used to communicate
    between the client and server web processes.

3.3

A protocol suite is a set of protocols that work together to provide
comprehensive network communication services.
Protocol suites are designed to work with each other seamlessly.
A protocol suite is a group of inter-related protocols necessary to perform a
communication function.

During the evolution of network communications and the internet there were
several competing protocol suites, for instance: TCP/IP, ISO, AppleTalk, Novell
Netware.

TCP/IP protocols are available for the application, transport, and internet
layers. There are no TCP/IP protocols in the network access layer.

Today, the TCP/IP protocol suite includes many protocols and continues to evolve
to support new services.

Application Layer Protocols:

Name System:
  - DNS - Domain Name System. Translates domain names such as cisco.com, into IP
    addresses.

Host Config:
  - DHCPv4 - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv4. A DHCPv4 server
    dynamically assigns IPv4 addressing information to DHCPv4 clients at
    start-up and allows the addresses to be re-used when no longer needed.

  - DHCPv6 - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6. DHCPv6 is similar to
    DHCPv4. A DHCPv6 server dynamically assigns IPv6 addressing information to
    DHCPv6 clients at start-up.

  - SLAAC - Stateless Address Autoconfiguration. A method that allows a device
    to obtain its IPv6 addressing information without using a DHCPv6 server.

Email:
  - SMTP - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. Enables clients to send email to a
    mail server and enables servers to send email to other servers.

  - POP3 - Post Office Protocol version 3. Enables clients to retrieve email
    from a mail server and download the email to the client's local mail
    application.

  - IMAP - Internet Message Access Protocol. Enables clients to access email
    stored on a mail server as well as maintaining email on the server.

File Transfer:
  - FTP - File Transfer Protocol. Sets the rules that enable a user on one host
    to access and transfer files to and from another host over a network. FTP is
    a reliable, connection-oriented, and acknowledged file delivery protocol.
  
  - SFTP - SSH File Transfer Protocol. As an extension to Secure Shell (SSH)
    protocol, SFTP can be used to establish a secure file transfer session in
    which the file transfer is encrypted. SSH is a method for secure remote
    login that is typically used for accessing the command line of a device.
  
  - TFTP - Trivial File Transfer Protocol. A simple, connectionless file
    transfer protocol with best-effort, unacknowledged file delivery. It uses
    less overhead than FTP. Web and Web Service

  - HTTP - Hypertext Transfer Protocol. A set of rules for exchanging text,
    graphic images, sound, video, and other multimedia files on the World Wide
    Web.
  
  - HTTPS - HTTP Secure. A secure form of HTTP that encrypts the data that is
    exchanged over the World Wide Web.
  
  - REST - Representational State Transfer. A web service that uses application
    programming interfaces (APIs) and HTTP requests to create web applications.

Transport layer:

Connection-Oriented:
  - TCP - Transmission Control Protocol. Enables reliable communication between
    processes running on separate hosts and provides reliable, acknowledged
    transmissions that confirm successful delivery.

Connectionless:
  - UDP - User Datagram Protocol. Enables a process running on one host to send
    packets to a process running on another host. However, UDP does not confirm
    successful datagram transmission.

Internet Layer:

Internet Protocol:
  - IPv4 - Internet Protocol version 4. Receives message segments from the
    transport layer, packages messages into packets, and addresses packets for
    end-to-end delivery over a network. IPv4 uses a 32-bit address.
    
  - IPv6 - IP version 6. Similar to IPv4 but uses a 128-bit address.
  
  - NAT - Network Address Translation. Translates IPv4 addresses from a private
    network into globally unique public IPv4 addresses.

Messaging:
  - ICMPv4 - Internet Control Message Protocol for IPv4. Provides feedback from
    a destination host to a source host about errors in packet delivery.
    
  - ICMPv6 - ICMP for IPv6. Similar functionality to ICMPv4 but is used for IPv6
    packets.
    
  - ICMPv6 ND - ICMPv6 Neighbor Discovery. Includes four protocol messages that
    are used for address resolution and duplicate address detection.
  
Routing Protocols:
  - OSPF - Open Shortest Path First. Link-state routing protocol that uses a
    hierarchical design based on areas. OSPF is an open standard interior
    routing protocol.

  - EIGRP - EIGRP - Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol. An open standard
    routing protocol developed by Cisco that uses a composite metric based on
    bandwidth, delay, load and reliability.

  - BGP - Border Gateway Protocol. An open standard exterior gateway routing
    protocol used between Internet Service Providers (ISPs). BGP is also
    commonly used between ISPs and their large private clients to exchange
    routing information.

Network Access Layer:
Address Resolution:
  - ARP - Address Resolution Protocol. Provides dynamic address mapping between
    an IPv4 address and a hardware address.

Data Link Protocols
  - Ethernet - Defines the rules for wiring and signaling standards of the
    network access layer.
    
  - WLAN - Wireless Local Area Network. Defines the rules for wireless signaling
    across the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz radio frequencies.

Esta parte del módulo la debo repasar muy bien. *

3.4

Standard organizations:
  - Internet Society (ISOC) - Responsible for promoting the open development and
    evolution of internet use throughout the world.
    
  - Internet Architecture Board (IAB) - Responsible for the overall management
    and development of internet standards.
    
  - Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) - Develops, updates, and maintains
    internet and TCP/IP technologies. This includes the process and documents
    for developing new protocols and updating existing protocols, which are
    known as Request for Comments (RFC) documents.
    
  - Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) - Focused on long-term research related
    to internet and TCP/IP protocols such as Anti-Spam Research Group (ASRG),
    Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG), and Peer-to-Peer Research Group (P2PRG).

  - Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) - Based in the
    United States, ICANN coordinates IP address allocation, the management of
    domain names, and assignment of other information used in TCP/IP protocols.

  - Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) - Responsible for overseeing and
    managing IP address allocation, domain name management, and protocol
    identifiers for ICANN.
    
  - Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE, pronounced
    “I-triple-E”) - Organization of electrical engineering and electronics
    dedicated to advancing technological innovation and creating standards in a
    wide area of industries including power and energy, healthcare,
    telecommunications, and networking. Important IEEE networking standards
    include 802.3 Ethernet and 802.11 WLAN standard. Search the internet for
    other IEEE network standards.
  
  - Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA) - Organization is best known for its
    standards relating to electrical wiring, connectors, and the 19-inch racks
    used to mount networking equipment.
  
  - Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) - Organization responsible for
    developing communication standards in a variety of areas including radio
    equipment, cellular towers, Voice over IP (VoIP) devices, satellite
    communications, and more.
  
  - International Telecommunications Union-Telecommunication Standardization
    Sector (ITU-T) - One of the largest and oldest communication standards
    organizations. The ITU-T defines standards for video compression, Internet
    Protocol Television (IPTV), and broadband communications, such as a digital
    subscriber line (DSL).


Esta parte también la debo estudiar antes del test *.

3.5
9/3/2023 22:58:34

Complex concepts such as how a network operates can be difficult to explain and
understand. For this reason, a layered model is used to modularize the
operations of a network into manageable layers.

there are two layered models that are used to describe network operations:
  - Open System Interconnection (OSI) Reference Model
  - TCP/IP Reference Model

OSI model layers
  - Application: The application layer contains protocols used for
    process-to-process communications.

  - Presentation: The presentation layer provides for common representation of
    the data transferred between application layer services.

  - Session: The session layer provides services to the presentation layer to
    organize its dialogue and to manage data exchange.

  - Transport: 	The transport layer defines services to segment, transfer, and
    reassemble the data for individual communications between the end devices.

  - Network: The network layer provides services to exchange the individual
    pieces of data over the network between identified end devices.

  - Data Link: The data link layer protocols describe methods for exchanging
    data frames between devices over a common media

  - Physical: The physical layer protocols describe the mechanical, electrical,
    functional, and procedural means to activate, maintain, and de-activate
    physical connections for a bit transmission to and from a network device.

The TCP/IP protocol model for internetwork communications was created in the
early 1970s and is sometimes referred to as the internet model.
  - Application: Represents data to the user, plus encoding and dialog
    control.
  
  - Transport: Supports communication between various devices across diverse
    networks.
  
  - Internet: Determines the best path through the network.
  
  - Network Access: Controls the hardware devices and media that make up the
    network.

Debo volver a hacer el labo de 3.5, está bueno. *

3.6
Segmentation is the process of dividing a stream of data into smaller units for
transmissions over the network.

Segmenting messages has two primary benefits:
  - Increases speed - Because a large data stream is segmented into packets,
    large amounts of data can be sent over the network without tying up a
    communications link. This allows many different conversations to be
    interleaved on the network called multiplexing.

  - Increases efficiency -If a single segment is fails to reach its destination
    due to a failure in the network or network congestion, only that segment
    needs to be retransmitted instead of resending the entire data stream.

Sequencing refers to labeling the packets. 

Definitions: *
  - Data: The general term for the PDU used at the application layer
  - Segment: Transport layer PDU
  - Packet: Network layer PDU
  - Frame: Data Link layer PDU
  - Bits: Physical layer PDU used when physically transmitting data over the
    medium

Note: If the Transport header is TCP, then it is a segment. If the Transport
header is UDP then it is a datagram.

When messages are being sent on a network, the encapsulation process works from
top to bottom.

De-encapsulation is the process used by a receiving device to remove one or more
of the protocol headers.

3.7

Addresses
  - Network layer source and destination addresses - Responsible for delivering
    the IP packet from the original source to the final destination, which may
    be on the same network or a remote network.

  - Data link layer source and destination addresses - Responsible for
    delivering the data link frame from one network interface card (NIC) to
    another NIC on the same network.

The IP packet contains two IP Addresses:
  - Source IP address - The IP address of the sending device, which is the
    original source of the packet.
  
  - Destination IP address - The IP address of the receiving device, which is
    the final destination of the packet.

An IP address contains two parts:

  - Network portion (IPv4) or Prefix (IPv6) - The left-most part of the address
    that indicates the network in which the IP address is a member. All devices
    on the same network will have the same network portion of the address.
  
  - Host portion (IPv4) or Interface ID (IPv6) - The remaining part of the
    address that identifies a specific device on the network. This portion is
    unique for each device or interface on the network.

Esto no lo entiendo muy bien. *

MAC addresses are physically embedded on the Ethernet NIC.
  - Source MAC address - This is the data link address, or the Ethernet MAC
    address, of the device that sends the data link frame with the encapsulated
    IP packet. The MAC address of the Ethernet NIC of PC1 is AA-AA-AA-AA-AA-AA,
    written in hexadecimal notation. (Media Access Control)
    
  - Destination MAC address - When the receiving device is on the same network
    as the sending device, this is the data link address of the receiving
    device. In this example, the destination MAC address is the MAC address of
    the FTP server: CC-CC-CC-CC-CC-CC, written in hexadecimal notation.
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 4 Protocols and Models
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9/9/2023 20:50:04

4.1
Before any network communications can occur, a physical connection to a local
network must be established.

Devices on a wireless network must be connected to a wireless access point (AP)
or wireless router

These are the components of an access point:
  1 The wireless antennas
  2 Several Ethernet switchports
  3 An internet port

WLAN -> Wireless NIC.

The OSI physical layer provides the means to transport the bits that make up a
data link layer frame across the network media.

TCP/IP suite are defined by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)

the physical layer hardware, media, encoding, and signaling standards are
defined and governed by these standards organizations:
  - International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
  - Telecommunications Industry Association/Electronic Industries Association
    (TIA/EIA)
  - International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
  - American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
  - Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
  - National telecommunications regulatory authorities including the Federal
    Communication Commission (FCC) in the USA and the European
    Telecommunications
  - Standards Institute (ETSI)
  
Local specifications
  - CSA (Canadian Standards Association)
  - CENELEC (European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization)
  - JSA/JIS (Japanese Standards Association)
  
The TCP/IP standards are implemented in software and governed by the IETF.

The physical layer standars are implemented in hardware and are governed by many
organizations including:
  - ISO
  - ANSI/TIA
  - ITU-T
  - ANSI
  - IEE
  
The physical layer standards address three functional areas:
  - Physical Components: connectors that transmit the signals that represent the
    bits.
    
  - Encoding: Encoding or line encoding is a method of converting a stream of
    data bits into a predefined "code”.
    Manchester encoding represents a 0 bit by a high to low voltage transition
    
  - Signaling: The way that bits are represented is called the signaling
    method.

Bandwidth: The capacity at which a medium can carry data.
Bits are sent at the speed of electricity. The difference is the number of bits
that are transmitted per second.
 
Terms used to measure the quality of bandwidth include:
  - Latency: Amount of time, including delays, for data to travel from one given
    point to another.
    
  - Throughput: Measure of the transfer of bits across the media over a given
    period of time.

    There are many factors that influence throughput:
      * The amount of traffic
      * The type of traffic
      * The latency created by the number of network devices encountered between
        source and destination
    
  - Goodput: measure of usable data transferred over a given period of time.

it will only take one segment in the path with low throughput to create a
bottleneck in the throughput of the entire network.

4.3

Networks use copper media because it is inexpensive, easy to install, and has
low resistance to electrical current. However, copper media is limited by
distance and signal interference. This is referred to as signal attenuation. For
this reason, all copper media must follow strict distance limitations as
specified by the guiding standards.

The timing and voltage values of the electrical pulses are also susceptible to
interference from two sources:

  - Electromagnetic interference (EMI) or radio frequency interference (RFI):
  Potential sources of EMI and RFI include radio waves and electromagnetic
  devices, such as fluorescent lights or electric motors.

  - Crosstalk:
   disturbance caused by the electric or magnetic fields of a signal on one wire
   to the signal in an adjacent wire.

4.4

UTP cabling conforms to the standards established jointly by the TIA/EIA.

The electrical characteristics of copper cabling are defined by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)

Cables are placed into categories based on their ability to carry higher
bandwidth rates.

Cables are placed into categories based on their ability to carry higher
bandwidth rates. For example, Category 5 cable is used commonly in 100BASE-TX
Fast Ethernet installations. Other categories include Enhanced Category 5 cable,
Category 6, and Category 6a.

Categories of UTP Cable:

  - Category 3 was originally used for voice communication over voice lines, but
    later used for data transmission.
    
  - Category 5 and 5e is used for data transmission. Category 5 supports 100Mbps
    and Category 5e supports 1000 Mbps
    
  - Category 6 has an added separator between each wire pair to support higher
    speeds. Category 6 supports up to 10 Gbps.
    
  - Category 7 also supports 10 Gbps.
  
  - Category 8 supports 40 Gbps.

The TIA/EIA-568 standard describes the wire color codes to pin assignments
(pinouts) for Ethernet cables.

The following are the main cable types that are obtained by using specific
wiring conventions:

  - Ethernet Straight-through: The most common type of networking cable. It is
    commonly used to interconnect a host to a switch and a switch to a router.

  - Ethernet Crossover: A cable used to interconnect similar devices. For
    example, to connect a switch to a switch, a host to a host, or a router to a
    router. However, crossover cables are now considered legacy as NICs use
    medium-dependent interface crossover (auto-MDIX) to automatically detect the
    cable type and make the internal connection.

Fiber-optic cables are broadly classified into two types:
  - Single-mode fiber (SMF)
  - Multimode fiber (MMF)

SMF is popular in long-distance situations spanning hundreds of kilometers

MMFs are popular in LANs because they can be powered by low-cost LEDs. It
provides bandwidth up to 10 Gbps over link lengths of up to 550 meters.

One of the highlighted differences between MMF and SMF is the amount of
dispersion. Dispersion refers to the spreading out of a light pulse over time.
Increased dispersion means increased loss of signal strength. MMF has a greater
dispersion than SMF. That is why MMF can only travel up to 500 meters before
signal loss.

Fiber-optic cabling is now being used in four types of industry:
  - Enterprise Networks: Used for backbone cabling applications and
    interconnecting
  
  - infrastructure devices Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH): Used to provide always-on
    broadband services to homes and small businesses 
   
  - Long-Haul Networks: Used by service providers to connect countries and
    cities 

  - Submarine Cable Networks: Used to provide reliable high-speed, high-capacity
    solutions capable of surviving in harsh undersea environments at up to
    transoceanic distances. Search the internet for “submarine cables
    telegeography map” to view various maps online.

Fiber-Optic Conectors

Straight-Tip (ST) Connectors:
ST connectors were one of the first connector types used.

Subscriber Connector (SC) Connectors:
They are a widely-adopted LAN and WAN connector that uses a push-pull mechanism
to ensure positive insertion.

Lucent Connector (LC) Simplex Connectors:
LC simplex connectors are a smaller version of the SC connector. These are
sometimes called little or local connectors and are quickly growing in
popularity due to their smaller size.

Duplex Multimode LC Connectors:
A duplex multimode LC connector is similar to an LC simplex connector, but uses
a duplex connector.

Fiber patch cords are required for interconnecting infrastructure devices. The
use of color distinguishes between single-mode and multimode patch cords. A
yellow jacket is for single-mode fiber cables and orange (or aqua) for multimode
fiber cables.

Fiber Patch Cords:
  - SC-SC Multimode Patch Cord
  - LC-LC Single-Mode Patch Cord
  - ST-LC Multimode Patch Cord
  - SC-ST Single-Mode Patch Cord

4.6

These are the wireless standards:

  - Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11) - Wireless LAN (WLAN) technology, commonly referred to
    as Wi-Fi. WLAN uses a contention-based protocol known as carrier sense
    multiple access/collision avoidance (CSMA/CA). The wireless NIC must first
    listen before transmitting to determine if the radio channel is clear. If
    another wireless device is transmitting, then the NIC must wait until the
    channel is clear. Wi-Fi is a trademark of the Wi-Fi Alliance. Wi-Fi is used
    with certified WLAN devices based on the IEEE 802.11 standards.

  - Bluetooth (IEEE 802.15) - This is a wireless personal area network (WPAN)
    standard, commonly known as “Bluetooth.” It uses a device pairing process to
    communicate over distances from 1 to 100 meters.

  - WiMAX (IEEE 802:16) - Commonly known as Worldwide Interoperability for
    Microware Access (WiMAX), this wireless standard uses a point-to-multipoint
    topology to provide wireless broadband access.

  - Zigbee (IEEE 802.15.4) - Zigbee is a specification used for low-data rate,
    low-power communications. It is intended for applications that require
    short-range, low data-rates and long battery life. Zigbee is typically used
    for industrial and Internet of Things (IoT) environments such as wireless
    light switches and medical device data collection.

In general, a WLAN requires the following network devices:

  - Wireless Access Point (AP) - These concentrate the wireless signals from
    users and connect to the existing copper-based network infrastructure, such
    as Ethernet. Home and small business wireless routers integrate the
    functions of a router, switch, and access point into one device, as shown in
    the figure.
  
  - Wireless NIC adapters - These provide wireless communication capability to
    network hosts.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 5 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 6 Purpose of the data link layer
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.1
9/11/2023 15:41:18

The data link layer does the following:
  - Enables upper layers to access the media. The upper layer protocol is
    completely unaware of the type of media that is used to forward the data.

  - Accepts data, usually Layer 3 packets (i.e., IPv4 or IPv6), and encapsulates
    them into Layer 2 frames.

  - Controls how data is placed and received on the media.

  - Exchanges frames between endpoints over the network media.

  - Receives encapsulated data, usually Layer 3 packets, and directs them to the
    proper upper-layer protocol.

  - Performs error detection and rejects any corrupt frame.

In computer networks, a node is a device that can receive, create, store, or
forward data along a communications path.

IEEE 802 LAN/MAN standards are specific to Ethernet LANs, wireless LANs (WLAN),
wireless personal area networks (WPAN) and other types of local and metropolitan
area networks.

  - Logical Link Control (LLC) - This IEEE 802.2 sublayer communicates between
    the networking software at the upper layers and the device hardware at the
    lower layers. It places information in the frame that identifies which
    network layer protocol is being used for the frame. This information allows
    multiple Layer 3 protocols, such as IPv4 and IPv6, to use the same network
    interface and media.
   
  - Media Access Control (MAC) – Implements this sublayer (IEEE 802.3, 802.11,
    or 802.15) in hardware. It is responsible for data encapsulation and media
    access control. It provides data link layer addressing and it is integrated
    with various physical layer technologies.

The LLC sublayer takes the network protocol data, which is typically an IPv4 or
IPv6 packet, and adds Layer 2 control information to help deliver the packet to
the destination node.

The MAC sublayer controls the NIC and other hardware that is responsible for
sending and receiving data on the wired or wireless LAN/MAN medium.

The MAC sublayer provides data encapsulation:
  - Frame delimiting - The framing process provides important delimiters to
    identify fields within a frame. These delimiting bits provide
    synchronization between the transmitting and receiving nodes.

  - Addressing - Provides source and destination addressing for transporting the
    Layer 2 frame between devices on the same shared medium.

  - Error detection - Includes a trailer used to detect transmission errors.

Full-duplex communications do not require access control.

At each hop along the path, a router performs the following Layer 2 functions:
  - Accepts a frame from a medium
  - De-encapsulates the frame
  - Re-encapsulates the packet into a new frame
  - Forwards the new frame appropriate to the medium of that segment of the
    physical network

Engineering organizations that define open standards and protocols that apply to
the network access layer (i.e., the OSI physical and data link layers) include
the following:
  - Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
  - International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
  - International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
  - American National Standards Institute (ANSI)

6.2

The data link layer must know the logical topology of a network in order to be
able to determine what is needed to transfer frames from one device to another.
This topic explains the ways in which the data link layer works with different
logical network topologies.

There are two types of topologies used when describing LAN and WAN networks:
  - Physical topology – Identifies the physical connections and how end devices
    and intermediary devices (i.e, routers, switches, and wireless access
    points) are interconnected. The topology may also include specific device
    location such as room number and location on the equipment rack. Physical
    topologies are usually point-to-point or star.
  
  - Logical topology - Refers to the way a network transfers frames from one
    node to the next. This topology identifies virtual connections using device
    interfaces and Layer 3 IP addressing schemes.

The data link layer "sees" the logical topology of a network when controlling
data access to the media. It is the logical topology that influences the type of
network framing and media access control used.

WAN topologies:

point-to-point: link between two endpoints.
Hub and Spoke: WAN version of the start topology.
Mesh: High availability, but expensive due to interconnectedness.

A hybrid is a variation or combination of any topologies.

Early star topologies interconnected end devices using Ethernet hubs.

Legacy LAN Topologies:
  - Bus - All end systems are chained to each other and terminated in some form
    on each end. Infrastructure devices such as switches are not required to
    interconnect the end devices. Legacy Ethernet networks were often bus
    topologies using coax cables because it was inexpensive and easy to set up.
  
  - Ring - End systems are connected to their respective neighbor forming a
    ring. The ring does not need to be terminated, unlike in the bus topology.
    Legacy Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) and Token Ring networks used
    ring topologies.

There are two common modes of duplex:
  - Half duplex communication: Both devices can transmit and receive on the
    media but cannot do so simultaneously.

  - Full-duplex communication: Both devices can simultaneously transmit and
    receive on the shared media.

It is important that two interconnected interfaces operate using the same duplex
mode. Otherwise, there will be a duplex mismatch creating inefficiency and
latency on the link.

A multiaccess network is a network that can have two or more end devices
attempting to access the network simultaneously.

In contention-based multiaccess networks, all nodes are operating in
half-duplex, competing for the use of the medium. However, only one device can
send at a time. Examples of contention-based access methods include the
following:
  - Carrier sense multiple access with collision detection (CSMA/CD) used on
    legacy bus-topology Ethernet LANs
    
  - Carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) used on
    Wireless LANs

In a controlled-based multiaccess network, each node has its own time to use the
medium. Inefficient. Examples of multiaccess networks that use controlled access
include the following:
  - Legacy Token Ring
  - Legacy ARCNET

Note: Today, Ethernet networks operate in full-duplex and do not require an
access method.

Examples of contention-based access networks include the following:
  - Wireless LAN (uses CSMA/CA)
  - Legacy bus-topology Ethernet LAN (uses CSMA/CD)
  - Legacy Ethernet LAN using a hub (uses CSMA/CD)

CMSA/CA does not detect collisions but attempts to avoid them by waiting before
transmitting.  Each device that transmits includes the time duration that it
needs for the transmission. All other wireless devices receive this information
and know how long the medium will be unavailable.

The information appended to a frame is determined by the protocol being used.

The data link protocol is responsible for NIC-to-NIC communications within the
same network.

Although there are many different data link layer protocols that describe data
link layer frames, each frame type has three basic parts:
  - Header
  - Data
  - Trailer

The structure of the frame and the fields contained in the header and trailer
vary according to the protocol.

There is no one frame structure that meets the needs of all data transportation
across all types of media. control information needed in the frame varies to
match the access control requirements of the media and logical topology. a WLAN
frame must include procedures for collision avoidance and therefore requires
additional control information when compared to an Ethernet frame.

in a fragile environment, more controls are needed to ensure delivery. The
header and trailer fields are larger as more control information is needed.

Frame fields include the following: Frame start and stop indicator flags -
Used to identify the beginning and end limits of the frame:
  - Addressing - Indicates the source and destination nodes on the media.

  - Type - Identifies the Layer 3 protocol in the data field.

  - Control - Identifies special flow control services such as quality of
    service (QoS). QoS gives forwarding priority to certain types of messages.
    For example, voice over IP (VoIP) frames normally receive priority because
    they are sensitive to delay.

  - Data - Contains the frame payload (i.e., packet header, segment header, and
    the data).

  - Error Detection - Included after the data to form the trailer.

the cyclic redundancy check (CRC) value. This value is placed in the frame check
sequence (FCS) field to represent the contents of the frame.

The data link layer address is only used for local delivery. Addresses at this
layer have no meaning beyond the local network.

Ethernet protocols are used by wired LANs. Wireless communications fall under
WLAN (IEEE 802.11) protocols.
  - Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)
  - High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC)
  - Frame Relay
  - Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)
  - X.25
These Layer 2 protocols are now being replaced in the WAN by Ethernet.

The difference in bandwidth normally results in the use of different protocols
for LANs and WANs. Data link layer protocols include:
  - Ethernet
  - 802.11 Wireless
  - Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)
  - High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC)
  - Frame Relay
  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 7 Ethernet Switching 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7.1
9/12/2023 13:54:10

Ethernet operates in the data link layer and the physical layer. It is a family
of networking technologies defined in the IEEE 802.2 and 802.3 standards.
Ethernet supports data bandwidths of the following:
  - 10 Mbps
  - 100 Mbps
  - 1000 Mbps (1 Gbps)
  - 10,000 Mbps (10 Gbps)
  - 40,000 Mbps (40 Gbps)
  - 100,000 Mbps (100 Gbps)

[IA]: Ethernet can be described as a combination of standards, a technology, and
a set of protocols used for local area networking. 

Ethernet is defined by data link layer and physical layer protocols:
  - Physical layer and Data Link MAC are part of the 802.3
  - Data link LLC is part of the 802.2
  
IEEE 802 LAN/MAN protocols, including Ethernet, use the following two separate
sublayers of the data link layer to operate. They are the Logical Link Control
(LLC) and the Media Access Control (MAC), as shown in the figure.
  
LLC Sublayer - This IEEE 802.2 sublayer communicates between the networking
software at the upper layers and the device hardware at the lower layers.   

MAC Sublayer - This sublayer (IEEE 802.3, 802.11, or 802.15 for example) is
implemented in hardware and is responsible for data encapsulation and media
access control. 

The MAC sublayer is responsible for data encapsulation and accessing the
media.

IEEE 802.3 data encapsulation includes the following:
  - Ethernet frame - This is the internal structure of the Ethernet frame.

  - Ethernet Addressing - The Ethernet frame includes both a source and
    destination MAC address to deliver the Ethernet frame from Ethernet NIC to
    Ethernet NIC on the same LAN.

  - Ethernet Error detection - The Ethernet frame includes a frame check
    sequence (FCS) trailer used for error detection.

he IEEE 802.3 MAC sublayer includes the specifications for different Ethernet
communications standards over various types of media including copper and
fiber.
  - IEEE 802.3u: Fast Ethernet
  - IEEE 802.3z: Gigabit Ethernet over Fiber
  - IEEE 802.3ab Gigabit Ethernet over Copper
  - IEEE 802.3ae: 10 Gigabit Ethernet over Fiber

Ethernet over a half-duplex medium uses a contention-based access method,
carrier sense multiple access/collision detection (CSMA/CD)

The minimum Ethernet frame size is 64 bytes and the expected maximum is 1518
bytes. This includes all bytes from the destination MAC address field through
the frame check sequence (FCS) field. The preamble field is not included when
describing the size of the frame.

Any frame less than 64 bytes in length is considered a “collision fragment” or
“runt frame” and is automatically discarded by receiving stations. Frames with
more than 1500 bytes of data are considered “jumbo” or “baby giant frames”.

Jumbo frames are usually supported by most Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet
switches and NICs.

Ethernet Frame Fields Detail:

  - Preamble and Start Frame Delimiter Fields: The Preamble (7 bytes) and Start
    Frame Delimiter (SFD), also called the Start of Frame (1 byte), fields are
    used for synchronization between the sending and receiving devices. These
    first eight bytes of the frame are used to get the attention of the
    receiving nodes. Essentially, the first few bytes tell the receivers to get
    ready to receive a new frame.

  - Destination MAC Address Field: This 6-byte field is the identifier for the
    intended recipient. As you will recall, this address is used by Layer 2 to
    assist devices in determining if a frame is addressed to them. The address
    in the frame is compared to the MAC address in the device. If there is a
    match, the device accepts the frame. Can be a unicast, multicast or
    broadcast address.

  - Source MAC Address Field: This 6-byte field identifies the originating NIC
    or interface of the frame.

  - Type / Length: This 2-byte field identifies the upper layer protocol
    encapsulated in the Ethernet frame. Common values are, in hexadecimal, 0x800
    for IPv4, 0x86DD for IPv6 and 0x806 for ARP.

  - Data Field: This field (46 - 1500 bytes) contains the encapsulated data from
    a higher layer, which is a generic Layer 3 PDU, or more commonly, an IPv4
    packet. All frames must be at least 64 bytes long. If a small packet is
    encapsulated, additional bits called a pad are used to increase the size of
    the frame to this minimum size.

  - Frame Check Sequence Field: The Frame Check Sequence (FCS) field (4 bytes)
    is used to detect errors in a frame. It uses a cyclic redundancy check
    (CRC). The sending device includes the results of a CRC in the FCS field of
    the frame. The receiving device receives the frame and generates a CRC to
    look for errors. If the calculations match, no error occurred. Calculations
    that do not match are an indication that the data has changed; therefore,
    the frame is dropped. A change in the data could be the result of a
    disruption of the electrical signals that represent the bits.

7.2
Thu 28 Sep 2023 02:35:15 PM -05

Hexadecimal numbers are often represented by the value preceded by 0x.

An Ethernet MAC address is:
  - 48 bits
  - 12 hex
  - 6 bytes
  
When a vendor assigns a MAC address to a device or Ethernet interface, the
vendor must do as follows:
  - Use its assigned OUI as the first 6 hexadecimal digits.
  - Assign a unique value in the last 6 hexadecimal digits.

All MAC addresses must be unique to the Ethernet device or Ethernet interface.

If there are duplicated MACs it will be necessary to modify the MAC address with
a new NIC or make modifications via software.

Sometimes the MAC address is referred to as a burned-in address (BIA) because
the address is hard coded into read-only memory (ROM) on the NIC.

The process that a source host uses to determine the destination MAC address
associated with an IPv4 address is known as Address Resolution Protocol (ARP).

The process that a source host uses to determine the destination MAC address
associated with an IPv6 address is known as Neighbor Discovery (ND).

An Ethernet broadcast frame is received and processed by every device on the
Ethernet LAN. The features of an Ethernet broadcast are as follows:
  - It has a destination MAC address of FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF in hexadecimal (48
    ones in binary).
  - It is flooded out all Ethernet switch ports except the incoming port.
  - It is not forwarded by a router.

DHCP for IPv4 is an example of a protocol that uses Ethernet and IPv4 broadcast
addresses.

not all Ethernet broadcasts carry an IPv4 broadcast packet. For example, ARP
Requests do not use IPv4, but the ARP message is sent as an Ethernet
broadcast.

The features of an Ethernet multicast are as follows:
  - There is a destination MAC address of 01-00-5E when the encapsulated data is
    an IPv4 multicast packet and a destination MAC address of 33-33 when the
    encapsulated data is an IPv6 multicast packet.

  - There are other reserved multicast destination MAC addresses for when the
    encapsulated data is not IP, such as Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) and Link
    Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP).
  
  - It is flooded out all Ethernet switch ports except the incoming port, unless
    the switch is configured for multicast snooping.

  - It is not forwarded by a router, unless the router is configured to route
    multicast packets.

7.3

The MAC address table is sometimes referred to as a content addressable memory
(CAM) table. While the term CAM table is fairly common, for the purposes of this
course, we will refer to it as a MAC address table.

Most Ethernet switches keep an entry in the table for 5 minutes.

If the destination MAC address is not in the table, the switch will forward the
frame out all ports except the incoming port. This is called an unknown
unicast.

A switch can have multiple MAC addresses associated with a single port. This is
common when the switch is connected to another switch. The switch will have a
separate MAC address table entry for each frame received with a different source
MAC address.

When a device has an IP address that is on a remote network, the Ethernet frame
cannot be sent directly to the destination device. Instead, the Ethernet frame
is sent to the MAC address of the default gateway, the router.

7.4

Switches use one of the following forwarding methods for switching data between
network ports:

  - Store-and-forward switching - This frame forwarding method receives the
    entire frame and computes the CRC. CRC uses a mathematical formula, based on
    the number of bits (1s) in the frame, to determine whether the received
    frame has an error. If the CRC is valid, the switch looks up the destination
    address, which determines the outgoing interface. Then the frame is
    forwarded out of the correct port.
  
  - Cut-through switching - This frame forwarding method forwards the frame
    before it is entirely received. At a minimum, the destination address of the
    frame must be read before the frame can be forwarded.
    
There are two variants of cut-through switching:
  - Fast-forward switching - Fast-forward switching offers the lowest level of
    latency. Fast-forward switching immediately forwards a packet after reading
    the destination address. Because fast-forward switching starts forwarding
    before the entire packet has been received, there may be times when packets
    are relayed with errors. This occurs infrequently, and the destination NIC
    discards the faulty packet upon receipt. In fast-forward mode, latency is
    measured from the first bit received to the first bit transmitted.
    Fast-forward switching is the typical cut-through method of switching.

  - Fragment-free switching - In fragment-free switching, the switch stores the
    first 64 bytes of the frame before forwarding. Fragment-free switching can
    be viewed as a compromise between store-and-forward switching and
    fast-forward switching. The reason fragment-free switching stores only the
    first 64 bytes of the frame is that most network errors and collisions occur
    during the first 64 bytes. Fragment-free switching tries to enhance
    fast-forward switching by performing a small error check on the first 64
    bytes of the frame to ensure that a collision has not occurred before
    forwarding the frame. Fragment-free switching is a compromise between the
    high latency and high integrity of store-and-forward switching, and the low
    latency and reduced integrity of fast-forward switching.

Memory Buffering Methods

Port-based memory
  - Frames are stored in queues that are linked to specific incoming and
    outgoing ports.
  - A frame is transmitted to the outgoing port only when all the frames ahead
    in the queue have been successfully transmitted.
  - It is possible for a single frame to delay the transmission of all the
    frames in memory because of a busy destination port.
  - This delay occurs even if the other frames could be transmitted to open
    destination ports.

Shared memory
  - Deposits all frames into a common memory buffer shared by all switch ports
    and the amount of buffer memory required by a port is dynamically
    allocated.
  - The frames in the buffer are dynamically linked to the destination port
    enabling a packet to be received on one port and then transmitted on another
    port, without moving it to a different queue.

There are two types of duplex settings used for communications on an Ethernet
network:

  - Full-duplex - Both ends of the connection can send and receive
    simultaneously.
  - Half-duplex - Only one end of the connection can send at a time.

Autonegotiation is an optional function found on most Ethernet switches and
NICs. It enables two devices to automatically negotiate the best speed and
duplex capabilities. Full-duplex is chosen if both devices have the capability
along with their highest common bandwidth.

Duplex mismatch occurs when one or both ports on a link are reset, and the
autonegotiation process does not result in both link partners having the same
configuration. Duplex mismatch is one of the most common causes of performance
issues on 10/100 Mbps Ethernet links.

A crossover cable is used when connecting like devices, and a straight-through
cable is used for connecting unlike devices.
For some reason, PC - router connection uses a crossover.

Auto-MDIX can be re-enabled using the mdix auto interface configuration
command.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 8 Network layer
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8.1

The network layer, provides services to allow end devices to exchange data
across networks. IP version 4 (IPv4) and IP version 6 (IPv6) are the principle
network layer communication protocols.

To accomplish end-to-end communications across network boundaries, network layer
protocols perform four basic operations:

  Addressing end devices: End devices must be configured with a unique IP
  address for identification on the network.

  Encapsulation: The network layer encapsulates the protocol data unit (PDU)
  from the transport layer into a packet. The encapsulation process adds IP
  header information, such as the IP address of the source (sending) and
  destination (receiving) hosts. The encapsulation process is performed by the
  source of the IP packet.

  Routing: The network layer provides services to direct the packets to a
  destination host on another network. To travel to other networks, the packet
  must be processed by a router. The role of the router is to select the best
  path and direct packets toward the destination host in a process known as
  routing. A packet may cross many routers before reaching the destination host.
  Each router a packet crosses to reach the destination host is called a hop.

  De-encapsulation: When the packet arrives at the network layer of the
  destination host, the host checks the IP header of the packet. If the
  destination IP address within the header matches its own IP address, the IP
  header is removed from the packet. After the packet is de-encapsulated by the
  network layer, the resulting Layer 4 PDU is passed up to the appropriate
  service at the transport layer. The de-encapsulation process is performed by
  the destination host of the IP packet.

The process of encapsulating data layer by layer enables the services at the
different layers to develop and scale without affecting the other layers. This
means the transport layer segments can be readily packaged by IPv4 or IPv6 or by
any new protocol that might be developed in the future.

It is important to note, that the IP addressing information remains the same
from the time the packet leaves the source host until it arrives at the
destination host, except when translated by the device performing Network
Address Translation (NAT) for IPv4.

IP was designed as a protocol with low overhead. It provides only the functions
that are necessary to deliver a packet from a source to a destination over an
interconnected system of networks.

These are the basic characteristics of IP:
  Connectionless - There is no connection with the destination established
  before sending data packets.
  Best Effort - IP is inherently unreliable because packet delivery is not
  guaranteed.
  Media Independent - Operation is independent of the medium (i.e., copper,
  fiber-optic, or wireless) carrying the data.
  
In some cases, an intermediate device, usually a router, must split up an IPv4
packet when forwarding it from one medium to another medium with a smaller MTU.
This process is called fragmenting the packet, or fragmentation. Fragmentation
causes latency. IPv6 packets cannot be fragmented by the router.

8.2
Significant fields in the IPv4 header include the following:

Version - Contains a 4-bit binary value set to 0100 that identifies this as an
IPv4 packet.

Differentiated Services or DiffServ (DS) - Formerly called the type of service
(ToS) field, the DS field is an 8-bit field used to determine the priority of
each packet. The six most significant bits of the DiffServ field are the
differentiated services code point (DSCP) bits and the last two bits are the
explicit congestion notification (ECN) bits.

Time to Live (TTL) – TTL contains an 8-bit binary value that is used to limit
the lifetime of a packet. The source device of the IPv4 packet sets the initial
TTL value. It is decreased by one each time the packet is processed by a router.
If the TTL field decrements to zero, the router discards the packet and sends an
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) Time Exceeded message to the source IP
address. Because the router decrements the TTL of each packet, the router must
also recalculate the Header Checksum.

Protocol – This field is used to identify the next level protocol. This 8-bit
binary value indicates the data payload type that the packet is carrying, which
enables the network layer to pass the data to the appropriate upper-layer
protocol. Common values include ICMP (1), TCP (6), and UDP (17).

Header Checksum – This is used to detect corruption in the IPv4 header.

Source IPv4 Address – This contains a 32-bit binary value that represents the
source IPv4 address of the packet. The source IPv4 address is always a unicast
address.

Destination IPv4 Address – This contains a 32-bit binary value that represents
the destination IPv4 address of the packet. The destination IPv4 address is a
unicast, multicast, or broadcast address.

8.3

IPv6 will eventually replace IPv4.

IPv4 still has three major issues:

IPv4 address depletion - IPv4 has a limited number of unique public addresses
available. Although there are approximately 4 billion IPv4 addresses, the
increasing number of new IP-enabled devices, always-on connections, and the
potential growth of less-developed regions have increased the need for more
addresses.

Lack of end-to-end connectivity - Network Address Translation (NAT) is a
technology commonly implemented within IPv4 networks. NAT provides a way for
multiple devices to share a single public IPv4 address. However, because the
public IPv4 address is shared, the IPv4 address of an internal network host is
hidden. This can be problematic for technologies that require end-to-end
connectivity.

Increased network complexity – While NAT has extended the lifespan of IPv4 it
was only meant as a transition mechanism to IPv6. NAT in its various
implementation creates additional complexity in the network, creating latency
and making troubleshooting more difficult.

In the early 1990s, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) grew concerned
about the issues with IPv4 and began to look for a replacement.

Improvements that IPv6 provides include the following:

Increased address space - IPv6 addresses are based on 128-bit hierarchical
addressing as opposed to IPv4 with 32 bits.

Improved packet handling - The IPv6 header has been simplified with fewer
fields.

Eliminates the need for NAT - With such a large number of public IPv6 addresses,
NAT between a private IPv4 address and a public IPv4 is not needed. This avoids
some of the NAT-induced problems experienced by applications that require
end-to-end connectivity.

One of the major design improvements of IPv6 over IPv4 is the simplified IPv6
header.

The fields in the IPv6 packet header include the following:

Version - This field contains a 4-bit binary value set to 0110 that identifies
this as an IP version 6 packet. Traffic Class - This 8-bit field is equivalent
to the IPv4 Differentiated Services (DS) field. Flow Label - This 20-bit field
suggests that all packets with the same flow label receive the same type of
handling by routers.

Payload Length - This 16-bit field indicates the length of the data portion or
payload of the IPv6 packet. This does not include the length of the IPv6 header,
which is a fixed 40-byte header.

Next Header - This 8-bit field is equivalent to the IPv4 Protocol field. It
indicates the data payload type that the packet is carrying, enabling the
network layer to pass the data to the appropriate upper-layer protocol.

Hop Limit - This 8-bit field replaces the IPv4 TTL field. This value is
decremented by a value of 1 by each router that forwards the packet. When the
counter reaches 0, the packet is discarded, and an ICMPv6 Time Exceeded message
is forwarded to the sending host,. This indicates that the packet did not reach
its destination because the hop limit was exceeded. Unlike IPv4, IPv6 does not
include an IPv6 Header Checksum, because this function is performed at both the
lower and upper layers. This means the checksum does not need to be recalculated
by each router when it decrements the Hop Limit field, which also improves
network performance.

Source IPv6 Address - This 128-bit field identifies the IPv6 address of the
sending host. Destination IPv6 Address - This 128-bit field identifies the IPv6
address of the receiving host.

Unlike IPv4, routers do not fragment routed IPv6 packets.

8.4

A host can send a packet to the following:

Itself - A host can ping itself by sending a packet to a special IPv4 address of
127.0.0.1 or an IPv6 address ::1, which is referred to as the loopback
interface. Pinging the loopback interface tests the TCP/IP protocol stack on the
host.

Local host - This is a destination host that is on the same local network as the
sending host. The source and destination hosts share the same network address.

Remote host - This is a destination host on a remote network. The source and
destination hosts do not share the same network address.

Whether a packet is destined for a local host or a remote host is determined by
the source end device. The source end device determines whether the destination
IP address is on the same network that the source device itself is on. The
method of determination varies by IP version:

In IPv4 - The source device uses its own subnet mask along with its own IPv4
address and the destination IPv4 address to make this determination.

In IPv6 - The local router advertises the local network address (prefix) to all
devices on the network.

The default gateway is the network device (i.e., router or Layer 3 switch) that
can route traffic to other networks.

On a network, a default gateway is usually a router with these features:

It has a local IP address in the same address range as other hosts on the local
network.

It can accept data into the local network and forward data out of the local
network.

It routes traffic to other networks.

A default gateway is required to send traffic outside of the local network.
Traffic cannot be forwarded outside the local network if there is no default
gateway, the default gateway address is not configured, or the default gateway
is down.

In IPv4, the host receives the IPv4 address of the default gateway either
dynamically from Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) or configured
manually. In IPv6, the router advertises the default gateway address or the host
can be configured manually.

On a Windows host, the route print or netstat -r command can be used to display
the host routing table.

Interface List - Lists the Media Access Control (MAC) address and assigned
interface number of every network-capable interface on the host, including
Ethernet, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth adapters.

IPv4 Route Table - Lists all known IPv4 routes, including direct connections,
local network, and local default routes.

IPv6 Route Table - Lists all known IPv6 routes, including direct connections,
local network, and local default routes.

8.5

The routing table stores three types of route entries:

Directly-connected networks - These network route entries are active router
interfaces. Routers add a directly connected route when an interface is
configured with an IP address and is activated. Each router interface is
connected to a different network segment. In the figure, the directly-connected
networks in the R1 IPv4 routing table would be 192.168.10.0/24 and
209.165.200.224/30.

Remote networks - These network route entries are connected to other routers.
Routers learn about remote networks either by being explicitly configured by an
administrator or by exchanging route information using a dynamic routing
protocol. In the figure, the remote network in the R1 IPv4 routing table would
be 10.1.1.0/24.

Default route – Like a host, most routers also include a default route entry, a
gateway of last resort. The default route is used when there is no better
(longer) match in the IP routing table. In the figure, the R1 IPv4 routing table
would most likely include a default route to forward all packets to router R2.

A router can learn about remote networks in one of two ways:
Manually - Remote networks are manually entered into the route table using
static routes.

Dynamically - Remote routes are automatically learned using a dynamic routing
protocol.

Static routes are route entries that are manually configured.

Static routing has the following characteristics:

A static route must be configured manually.

The administrator needs to reconfigure a static route if there is a change in
the topology and the static route is no longer viable.

A static route is appropriate for a small network and when there are few or no
redundant links.

A dynamic routing protocol allows the routers to automatically learn about
remote networks, including a default route, from other routers.

Dynamic routing protocols include OSPF and Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing
Protocol (EIGRP).


The dynamic routing protocol will automatically do as follows:

Discover remote networks

Maintain up-to-date routing information

Choose the best path to destination networks

Attempt to find a new best path if the current path is no longer available

It is common for some routers to use a combination of both static routes and a
dynamic routing protocol.

The show ip route privileged EXEC mode command is used to view the IPv4 routing
table on a Cisco IOS router. The example shows the IPv4 routing table of router
R1. At the beginning of each routing table entry is a code that is used to
identify the type of route or how the route was learned. Common route sources
(codes) include these:

L - Directly connected local interface IP address
C – Directly connected network
S – Static route was manually configured by an administrator
O - OSPF
D - EIGRP

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 9 Address Resolution
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9.1
Thu 05 Oct 2023 12:30:10 PM -05

There are two primary addresses assigned to a device on an Ethernet LAN:

Physical address (the MAC address) – Used for NIC to NIC communications on the
same Ethernet network.

Logical address (the IP address) – Used to send the packet from the source
device to the destination device. The destination IP address may be on the same
IP network as the source or it may be on a remote network.

When the destination IP address (IPv4 or IPv6) is on a remote network, the
destination MAC address will be the address of the host default gateway (i.e.,
the router interface).

How are the IP addresses of the IP packets in a data flow associated with the
MAC addresses on each link along the path to the destination? For IPv4 packets,
this is done through a process called Address Resolution Protocol (ARP). For
IPv6 packets, the process is ICMPv6 Neighbor Discovery (ND).

[Hacer la actividad 9.1.3 en Packet tracer] <-

9.2

ARP is what you need to map IPv4 addresses to MAC addresses.

ARP provides two basic functions:

Resolving IPv4 addresses to MAC addresses
Maintaining a table of IPv4 to MAC address mappings

When a packet is sent to the data link layer to be encapsulated into an Ethernet
frame, the device refers to a table in its memory to find the MAC address that
is mapped to the IPv4 address. This table is stored temporarily in RAM memory
and called the ARP table or the ARP cache.

The sending device will search its ARP table for a destination IPv4 address and
a corresponding MAC address.

If the packet’s destination IPv4 address is on the same network as the source
IPv4 address, the device will search the ARP table for the destination IPv4
address.

If the destination IPv4 address is on a different network than the source IPv4
address, the device will search the ARP table for the IPv4 address of the
default gateway.

The ARP request is encapsulated in an Ethernet frame using the following header
information:

Destination MAC address – This is a broadcast address FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF
requiring all Ethernet NICs on the LAN to accept and process the ARP request.

Source MAC address – This is MAC address of the sender of the ARP request. Type
- ARP messages have a type field of 0x806. This informs the receiving NIC that
the data portion of the frame needs to be passed to the ARP process.

The ARP reply is encapsulated in an Ethernet frame using the following header
information:

Destination MAC address – This is the MAC address of the sender of the ARP
request.

Source MAC address – This is the MAC address of the sender of the ARP reply.

Type - ARP messages have a type field of 0x806. This informs the receiving NIC
that the data portion of the frame needs to be passed to the ARP process.

Additionally, static map entries can be entered in an ARP table, but this is
rarely done. Static ARP table entries do not expire over time and must be
manually removed.

IPv6 uses a similar process to ARP for IPv4, known as ICMPv6 Neighbor Discovery
(ND).

For each device, an ARP cache timer removes ARP entries that have not been used
for a specified period of time.

On a Cisco router, the show ip arp command is used to display the ARP table

#show ip arp -> Display the ARP table
$arp - a -> Windows command to display the ARP table.

For large networks, arp impact network performance. After the devices send out
the initial ARP broadcasts and have learned the necessary MAC addresses, any
impact on the network will be minimized.

In some cases, the use of ARP can lead to a potential security risk. The threat
actor sends an ARP reply with its own MAC address. The receiver of the ARP reply
will add the wrong MAC address to its ARP table and send these packets to the
threat actor.

[Realizar actividad de packet tracer] <- 9.2.9

9.3

If your network is using the IPv6 communications protocol, the Neighbor
Discovery protocol, or ND, is what you need to match IPv6 addresses to MAC
addresses.

ND provides address resolution, router discovery, and redirection services for
IPv6 using ICMPv6. ICMPv6 ND uses five ICMPv6 messages to perform these
services:
  - Neighbor Solicitation messages
  - Neighbor Advertisement messages
  - Router Solicitation messages
  - Router Advertisement messages
  - Redirect Message

Neighbor Solicitation and Neighbor Advertisement messages are used for
device-to-device messaging such as address resolution (similar to ARP for IPv4).
Devices include both host computers and routers.

Router Solicitation and Router Advertisement messages are for messaging between
devices and routers. Typically router discovery is used for dynamic address
allocation and stateless address autoconfiguration (SLAAC).

ICMPv6 Neighbor Solicitation and Neighbor Advertisement messages are used for
MAC address resolution.

ICMPv6 Neighbor Solicitation messages are sent using special Ethernet and IPv6
multicast addresses. This allows the Ethernet NIC of the receiving device to
determine whether the Neighbor Solicitation message is for itself without having
to send it to the operating system for processing.

[Hacer actividad 9.3.4 packet tracer] <-

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 10 Basic Router Configuration
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thu 05 Oct 2023 10:27:47 PM -05

1. Configure the device name
Router(config)# hostname [string]

2. Secure privileged EXEC mode.
Router(config)# enable secret [password]

3. Secure user EXEC mode.
Router(config)# line console 0
Router(config-line)# password [password]
Router(config-line)# login

4. Secure remote Telnet/SSH access.
Router(config-line)# line vty 0 4
Router(config-line)# password [password]
Router(config-line)# login
Router(config-line)# transport input {ssh | telnet}

5. Secure all passwords in the config line.
Router(config-line)# exit
Router(config)# service password-encryption

6. Provide legal notification
Router(config)# banner motd [delimiter][message][delimiter]

7. Save the configuration.
Router(config)# end
Router# copy running-config startup-config

[Packet tracer activity 10.1.4] <-

10.2

Configurar interfaces:

Router(config)# interface [type-and-number]
Router(config-if)# description [description-text]
Router(config-if)# ip address [ipv4-address] [subnet-mask]
Router(config-if)# ipv6 address [ipv6-address/prefix-length]
Router(config-if)# no shutdown

Confirmar la configuración:

R1# show ip interface brief
R1# show ipv6 interface brief

R1# show ip route
R1# show ipvo6 route

R1# show interfaces

R1# show ip interface
R1# show ipv6 inteface

10.3
The default gateway is only used when the host wants to send a packet to a
device on another network.

To configure an IPv4 default gateway on a switch, use the ip default-gateway
ip-address global configuration command.

Switch(config)# ip default-gateway [ip-address]

[Actividad de Packet Tracer 10.3.4] <- 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 11 IPv4 Addressing
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11.1

Fri 06 Oct 2023 09:29:24 PM -05

assigning an IPv4 address to a host requires the following:
  - IPv4 address - This is the unique IPv4 address of the host.
  - Subnet mask- This is used to identify the network/host portion of the IPv4
    address.

To identify the network and host portions of an IPv4 address, the subnet mask is
compared to the IPv4 address bit for bit, from left to right.

The actual process used to identify the network portion and host portion is
called ANDing.

The prefix length is the number of bits set to 1 in the subnet mask. It is
written in “slash notation”, which is noted by a forward slash (/) followed by
the number of bits set to 1.

Within each network are three types of IP addresses:
  - Network address
  - Host addresses
  - Broadcast address

A network address is an address that represents a specific network. A device
belongs to this network if it meets three criteria:
  - It has the same subnet mask as the network address.
  - It has the same network bits as the network address, as indicated by the
    subnet mask.
  - It is located on the same broadcast domain as other hosts with the same
    network address.

11.2

A unicast packet has a destination IP address that is a unicast address which
goes to a single recipient. A source IP address can only be a unicast address,
because the packet can only originate from a single source. This is regardless
of whether the destination IP address is a unicast, broadcast or multicast.

IPv4 uses broadcast packets. However, there are no broadcast packets with IPv6.

Therefore, broadcast traffic should be limited so that it does not adversely
affect the performance of the network or devices.

A device that is not directly connected to the destination network forwards an
IP directed broadcast in the same way it would forward unicast IP packets
destined to a host on that network.

Disable directed broadcasts Cisco router
# no ip directed-broadcasts

IPv4 has reserved the 224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255 addresses as a multicast
range.

Routing protocols such as OSPF use multicast transmissions.

11.3

Public IPv4 addresses are addresses which are globally routed between internet
service provider (ISP) routers.

The long-term solution to IPv4 address depletion was IPv6.

The Private Address Blocks

10.0.0.0/8 : 10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255
172.16.0.0/12 : 172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255
192.168.0.0/16 : 192.168.0.0 - 192.168.255.255

NAT - network address translation

Organizations that have resources available to the internet, such as a web
server, will also have devices that have public IPv4 addresses. As shown in the
figure, this part of the network is known as the DMZ (demilitarized zone).

Loopback addresses (127.0.0.0 /8 or 127.0.0.1 to 127.255.255.254) are more
commonly identified as only 127.0.0.1, these are special addresses used by a
host to direct traffic to itself.

Link-local addresses (169.254.0.0 /16 or 169.254.0.1 to 169.254.255.254) are
more commonly known as the Automatic Private IP Addressing (APIPA) addresses or
self-assigned addresses.

The RFC divided the unicast ranges into specific classes as follows:
  - Class A (0.0.0.0/8 to 127.0.0.0/8) - Designed to support extremely large
    networks with more than 16 million host addresses. Class A used a fixed /8
    prefix with the first octet to indicate the network address and the
    remaining three octets for host addresses (more than 16 million host
    addresses per network).
    
  - Class B (128.0.0.0 /16 - 191.255.0.0 /16) - Designed to support the needs of
    moderate to large size networks with up to approximately 65,000 host
    addresses. Class B used a fixed /16 prefix with the two high-order octets to
    indicate the network address and the remaining two octets for host addresses
    (more than 65,000 host addresses per network).
    
  - Class C (192.0.0.0 /24 - 223.255.255.0 /24) - Designed to support small
    networks with a maximum of 254 hosts. Class C used a fixed /24 prefix with
    the first three octets to indicate the network and the remaining octet for
    the host addresses (only 254 host addresses per network).

There is also a Class D multicast block consisting of 224.0.0.0 to 239.0.0.0 and
a Class E experimental address block consisting of 240.0.0.0 - 255.0.0.0.

Classful address allocation was replaced with classless addressing, which is
used today. Classless addressing ignores the rules of classes (A, B, C). Public
IPv4 network addresses (network addresses and subnet masks) are allocated based
on the number of addresses that can be justified.

Both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses are managed by the Internet Assigned Numbers
Authority (IANA).


Regional Internet Registries
  - AfriNIC (African Network Information Centre) - Africa Region
  - APNIC (Asia Pacific Network Information Centre) - Asia/Pacific Region
  - ARIN (American Registry for Internet Numbers) - North America Region
  - LACNIC (Regional Latin-American and Caribbean IP Address Registry) - Latin
    America and some Caribbean Islands
  - RIPE NCC (Réseaux IP Européens Network Coordination Centre) - Europe, the
    Middle East, and Central Asia

11.4

each router interface connects to a broadcast domain and broadcasts are only
propagated within that specific broadcast domain.

Large broadcasts domains generate large amount of traffic. The solution is to
reduce the size of the network to create smaller broadcast domains in a process
called subnetting. These smaller network spaces are called subnets.

Understanding how to subnet networks is a fundamental skill that all network
administrators must develop. Various methods have been created to help
understand this process. Although a little overwhelming at first, pay close
attention to the detail and, with practice, subnetting will become easier.

11.5

Subnets = 2^Subnet bits
Hosts = 2^Host bits - 2

11.6

network: 172.16.0.0
mask: 255.255.0.0
We need 100 subnets

The best I can do is 128 subnets.

Therefore, I need to borrow 7 bits for the subnets.
New mask is 255.255.254.0 or /23
Host per subnet: 510

172.16.0.0 -> 172.16.0.1 - 172.16.1.255
172.16.2.0 -> 172.16.2.1 - 172.16.3.255
172.16.4.0 -> 172.16.4.1 - 172.16.5.255
172.16.6.0 -> 172.16.6.1 - 172.16.7.255
...

network: 10.0.0.0/8
new mask: /18

Third octet: 11000000
number of hosts: 16384

10.0.0.0/18 -> 10.0.0.1/18 - 10.0.63.255
10.0.64.0/18 -> 10.0.64.1/18 - 10.0.127.255
10.0.128.0/18 -> 10.0.128.1/28 - 10.0.191.255
10.0.192.0/18 -> 10.0.192.1/28 - 10.0.255.255
10.1.0.0/18 -> 10.1.0.1 - 10.1.127.255

...

11.7

- Intranet - This is the internal part of a company’s network, accessible only
  within the organization. Devices in the intranet use private IPv4 addresses.

- DMZ - This is part of the company’s network containing resources available
  to the internet such as a web server. Devices in the DMZ use public IPv4
  addresses.

11.8

VLSM is just subnetting a subnet.

11.9

Before you start subnetting, you should develop an IPv4 addressing scheme for
your entire network. You will need to know how many subnets you need, how many
hosts a particular subnet requires, what devices are part of the subnet, which
parts of your network use private addresses, and which use public, and many
other determining factors. A good addressing scheme allows for growth. A good
addressing scheme is also the sign of a good network administrator.

Within a network, there are different types of devices that require addresses:

End user clients - Most networks allocate IPv4 addresses to client devices
dynamically, using Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). This reduces the
burden on network support staff and virtually eliminates entry errors. With
DHCP, addresses are only leased for a period of time, and can be reused when the
lease expires. This is an important feature for networks that support transient
users and wireless devices. Changing the subnetting scheme means that the DHCP
server needs to be reconfigured, and the clients must renew their IPv4
addresses. IPv6 clients can obtain address information using DHCPv6 or SLAAC.

Servers and peripherals - These should have a predictable static IP address. Use
a consistent numbering system for these devices.

Servers that are accessible from the internet - Servers that need to be publicly
available on the internet must have a public IPv4 address, most often accessed
using NAT. In some organizations, internal servers (not publicly available) must
be made available to the remote users. In most cases, these servers are assigned
private addresses internally, and the user is required to create a virtual
private network (VPN) connection to access the server. This has the same effect
as if the user is accessing the server from a host within the intranet.

Intermediary devices - These devices are assigned addresses for network
management, monitoring, and security. Because we must know how to communicate
with intermediary devices, they should have predictable, statically assigned
addresses.

Gateway - Routers and firewall devices have an IP address assigned to each
interface which serves as the gateway for the hosts in that network. Typically,
the router interface uses either the lowest or highest address in the network.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 12 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/24/2023 15:35:55

12.1
IPv6 is designed to be the successor to IPv4. IPv6 has a larger 128-bit address
space, providing 340 undecillion (i.e., 340 followed by 36 zeroes) possible
addresses. However, IPv6 is more than just larger addresses.

IETF enhanced limitations found in IPv4. One example is ICPMv6, which includes
address autoconfiguration not found in ICMP for IPv4.

NAT is problematic for many applications, creates latency, and has limitations
that severely impede peer-to-peer communications.

There is no specific date to move to IPv6. Both IPv4 and IPv6 will coexist in
the near future and the transition will take several years. The IETF has created
various protocols and tools to help network administrators migrate their
networks to IPv6. The migration techniques can be divided into three categories:

Dual Stack:
Dual stack allows IPv4 and IPv6 to coexist on the same network segment. Dual
stack devices run both IPv4 and IPv6 protocol stacks simultaneously. Known as
native IPv6, this means the customer network has an IPv6 connection to their ISP
and is able to access content found on the internet over IPv6.

Tunneling:
Tunneling is a method of transporting an IPv6 packet over an IPv4 network. The
IPv6 packet is encapsulated inside an IPv4 packet, similar to other types of
data.

Translation:
Network Address Translation 64 (NAT64) allows IPv6-enabled devices to
communicate with IPv4-enabled devices using a translation technique similar to
NAT for IPv4. An IPv6 packet is translated to an IPv4 packet and an IPv4 packet
is translated to an IPv6 packet.

12.2
IPv6 addresses are 128 bits in length and written as a string of hexadecimal
values. Every four bits is represented by a single hexadecimal digit; for a
total of 32 hexadecimal values, as shown in the figure. IPv6 addresses are not
case-sensitive and can be written in either lowercase or uppercase.

In IPv6, a hextet is the unofficial term used to refer to a segment of 16 bits,
or four hexadecimal values. Each “x” is a single hextet which is 16 bits or four
hexadecimal digits.

The first rule to help reduce the notation of IPv6 addresses is to omit any
leading 0s (zeros) in any hextet.
  - 01ab can be represented as 1ab
  - 09f0 can be represented as 9f0
  - 0a00 can be represented as a00
  - 00ab can be represented as ab

The second rule to help reduce the notation of IPv6 addresses is that a double
colon (::) can replace any single, contiguous string of one or more 16-bit
hextets consisting of all zeros.

2001:db8:cafe:1:0:0:0:1 -> 2001:db8:cafe:1::1

If an address has more than one contiguous string of all-0 hextets, best
practice is to use the double colon (::) on the longest string. If the strings
are equal, the first string should use the double colon (::).

12.3
10/25/2023 20:33:25
There are three broad categories of IPv6 addresses:

Unicast - An IPv6 unicast address uniquely identifies an interface on an
IPv6-enabled device.

Multicast - An IPv6 multicast address is used to send a single IPv6 packet to
multiple destinations.

Anycast - An IPv6 anycast address is any IPv6 unicast address that can be
assigned to multiple devices. A packet sent to an anycast address is routed to
the nearest device having that address. Anycast addresses are beyond the scope
of this course.

Unlike IPv4, IPv6 does not have a broadcast address. However, there is an IPv6
all-nodes multicast address that essentially gives the same result.

IPv6 uses slash notation only.

The prefix length can range from 0 to 128. The recommended IPv6 prefix length
for LANs and most other types of networks is /64.

It is strongly recommended to use a 64-bit Interface ID for most networks. This
is because stateless address autoconfiguration (SLAAC) uses 64 bits for the
Interface ID. It also makes subnetting easier to create and manage.

Unlike IPv4 devices that have only a single address, IPv6 addresses typically
have two unicast addresses:

Global Unicast Address (GUA) - This is similar to a public IPv4 address. These
are globally unique, internet-routable addresses. GUAs can be configured
statically or assigned dynamically.

Link-local Address (LLA) - This is required for every IPv6-enabled device. LLAs
are used to communicate with other devices on the same local link. With IPv6,
the term link refers to a subnet. LLAs are confined to a single link. Their
uniqueness must only be confirmed on that link because they are not routable
beyond the link. In other words, routers will not forward packets with a
link-local source or destination address.

GUAs are equivalent to public IPv4 addresses.

A GUA has three parts:

- Global Routing Prefix
- Subnet ID
- Interace ID

The IPv6 interface ID is equivalent to the host portion of an IPv4 address.

Unlike IPv4, in IPv6, the all-0s and all-1s host addresses can be assigned to a
device. The all-1s address can be used because broadcast addresses are not used
within IPv6. The all-0s address can also be used, but is reserved as a
Subnet-Router anycast address, and should be assigned only to routers.

An IPv6 link-local address (LLA) enables a device to communicate with other
IPv6-enabled devices on the same link and only on that link (subnet).

LLA is required, GUA is not.

IPv6 LLAs are in the fe80::/10 range. The /10 indicates that the first 10 bits
are 1111 1110 10xx xxxx. The first hextet has a range of 1111 1110 1000 0000
(fe80) to 1111 1110 1011 1111 (febf).

Routers use the LLA of neighbor routers to send routing updates.

Hosts use the LLA of a local router as the default-gateway.

Note: Typically, it is the LLA of the router, and not the GUA, that is used as
the default gateway for other devices on the link.

There are two ways that a device can obtain an LLA:

Statically - This means the device has been manually configured.

Dynamically - This means the device creates its own interface ID by using
randomly generated values or using the Extended Unique Identifier (EUI) method,
which uses the client MAC address along with additional bits.

12.4

IPv6 GUA Configuration on Router R1:

R1(config)# interface gigabitethernet 0/0/0
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address 2001:db8:acad:1::1/64
R1(config-if)# no shutdown
R1(config-if)# exit
R1(config)# interface gigabitethernet 0/0/1
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address 2001:db8:acad:2::1/64
R1(config-if)# no shutdown
R1(config-if)# exit
R1(config)# interface serial 0/1/0
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address 2001:db8:acad:3::1/64
R1(config-if)# no shutdown

Using the LLA of the router as the default gateway address is considered best
practice. Either configuration will work.

There are two ways in which a device can obtain an IPv6 GUA automatically:

Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)
Stateful DHCPv6

When an address begins with this hextet within the range of fe80 to febf, the
link-local parameter must follow the address.

Configuration of an LLA on router R1.

R1(config)# interface gigabitethernet 0/0/0
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address fe80::1:1 link-local
R1(config-if)# exit
R1(config)# interface gigabitethernet 0/0/1
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address fe80::2:1 link-local
R1(config-if)# exit
R1(config)# interface serial 0/1/0
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address fe80::3:1 link-local
R1(config-if)# exit

Note: The exact same LLA could be configured on each link as long as it is
unique on that link. This is because LLAs only have to be unique on that link.
However, common practice is to create a different LLA on each interface of the
router to make it easy to identify the router and the specific interface.

12.5
For the GUA, a device obtains the address dynamically through Internet Control
Message Protocol version 6 (ICMPv6) messages. IPv6 routers periodically send out
ICMPv6 RA messages, every 200 seconds, to all IPv6-enabled devices on the
network.

To enable a router as an IPv6 router, the ipv6 unicast-routing global
configuration command must be used.

The ICMPv6 RA message is a suggestion to a device on how to obtain an IPv6 GUA.
The ultimate decision is up to the device operating system. The ICMPv6 RA
message includes the following:

Network prefix and prefix length - This tells the device which network it
belongs to.

Default gateway address - This is an IPv6 LLA, the source IPv6 address of the RA
message.

DNS addresses and domain name - These are the addresses of DNS servers and a
domain name.

There are three methods for RA messages:

Method 1: SLAAC - “I have everything you need including the prefix, prefix
length, and default gateway address.”

Method 2: SLAAC with a stateless DHCPv6 server - “Here is my information but you
need to get other information such as DNS addresses from a stateless DHCPv6
server.”

Method 3: Stateful DHCPv6 (no SLAAC) - “I can give you your default gateway
address. You need to ask a stateful DHCPv6 server for all your other
information.”

SLAAC uses

Prefix - This is advertised in the RA message.

Interface ID - This uses the EUI-64 process or by generating a random 64-bit
number, depending on the device operating system.

SLAAC and Stateless DHCPv6

the RA message suggests devices use the following:

 - SLAAC to create its own IPv6 GUA

 - The router LLA, which is the RA source IPv6 address, as the default gateway
   address

 - A stateless DHCPv6 server to obtain other information such as a DNS server
   address and a domain name

A stateless DHCPv6 server distributes DNS server addresses and domain names. It
does not allocate GUAs.

Stateful DHCPv6

A router interface can be configured to send an RA using stateful DHCPv6 only.

Stateful DHCPv6 is similar to DHCP for IPv4. A device can automatically receive
its addressing information including a GUA, prefix length, and the addresses of
DNS servers from a stateful DHCPv6 server.

with this method, the RA message suggests devices use the following:

  - The router LLA, which is the RA source IPv6 address, for the default gateway
address. 
  - A stateful DHCPv6 server to obtain a GUA, DNS server address, domain
name and other necessary information.

A stateful DHCPv6 server allocates and maintains a list of which device receives
which IPv6 address. DHCP for IPv4 is stateful.

The default gateway address can only be obtained dynamically from the RA
message. The stateless or stateful DHCPv6 server does not provide the default
gateway address.

IEEE defined the Extended Unique Identifier (EUI) or modified EUI-64 process.
This process uses the 48-bit Ethernet MAC address of a client, and inserts
another 16 bits in the middle of the 48-bit MAC address to create a 64-bit
interface ID.

To ensure the uniqueness of any IPv6 unicast address, the client may use a
process known as Duplicate Address Detection (DAD). This is similar to an ARP
request for its own address. If there is no reply, then the address is unique.

12.6

All IPv6 devices must have an IPv6 LLA.

R1# show interface gigabitEthernet 0/0/0

R1# show ipv6 interface brief

the show ipv6 route command can be used to verify that IPv6 networks and
specific IPv6 interface addresses have been installed in the IPv6 routing table.

12.7

IPv6 multicast addresses have the prefix ff00::/8.
Multicast addresses can only be destination addresses and not source
addresses.

There are two types of IPv6 multicast addresses:

Well-known multicast addresses
Solicited node multicast addresses

These are two common IPv6 assigned multicast groups:

ff02::1 All-nodes multicast group - This is a multicast group that all
IPv6-enabled devices join. A packet sent to this group is received and processed
by all IPv6 interfaces on the link or network. This has the same effect as a
broadcast address in IPv4. The figure shows an example of communication using
the all-nodes multicast address. An IPv6 router sends ICMPv6 RA messages to the
all-node multicast group.

ff02::2 All-routers multicast group - This is a multicast group that all IPv6
routers join. A router becomes a member of this group when it is enabled as an
IPv6 router with the ipv6 unicast-routing global configuration command. A packet
sent to this group is received and processed by all IPv6 routers on the link or
network.

A solicited-node multicast address is similar to the all-nodes multicast
address. The advantage of a solicited-node multicast address is that it is
mapped to a special Ethernet multicast address. This allows the Ethernet NIC to
filter the frame by examining the destination MAC address without sending it to
the IPv6 process to see if the device is the intended target of the IPv6
packet.

12.8

IPv6 Address Configuration on Router R1

R1(config)# interface gigabitethernet 0/0/0
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address 2001:db8:acad:1::1/64
R1(config-if)# no shutdown
R1(config-if)# exit
R1(config)# interface gigabitethernet 0/0/1
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address 2001:db8:acad:2::1/64
R1(config-if)# no shutdown
R1(config-if)# exit
R1(config)# interface serial 0/1/0
R1(config-if)# ipv6 address 2001:db8:acad:3::1/64
R1(config-if)# no shutdown

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teoría: 13 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wed 11 Oct 2023 04:25:50 PM -05
13.1

Internet Control Message Protocols (ICMPs)

ICMP messages are not required and are often not allowed within a network for
security reasons.

The ICMP messages common to both ICMPv4 and ICMPv6 include:
  - Host reachability
  - Destination or Service Unreachable
  - Time exceeded
  
An ICMP Echo Message can be used to test the reachability of a host on an IP
network. This use of the ICMP Echo messages is the basis of the ping utility.

When a host or gateway receives a packet that it cannot deliver, it can use an
ICMP Destination Unreachable message to notify the source that the destination
or service is unreachable. The message will include a code that indicates why
the packet could not be delivered.

Some of the Destination Unreachable codes for ICMPv4 are as follows:
   - Net unreachable
   - Host unreachable
   - Protocol unreachable
   - Port unreachable

Some of the Destination Unreachable codes for ICMPv6 are as follows:
   - No route to destination
   - Communication with the destination is administratively prohibited (e.g.,
     firewall)
   – Beyond scope of the source address
   - Address unreachable
   - Port unreachable

An ICMPv4 Time Exceeded message is used by a router to indicate that a packet
cannot be forwarded because the Time to Live (TTL) field of the packet was
decremented to 0. If a router receives a packet and decrements the TTL field in
the IPv4 packet to zero, it discards the packet and sends a Time Exceeded
message to the source host.

ICMPv6 also sends a Time Exceeded message if the router cannot forward an IPv6
packet because the packet has expired. Instead of the IPv4 TTL field, ICMPv6
uses the IPv6 Hop Limit field to determine if the packet has expired.

Time Exceeded messages are used by the traceroute tool.

ICMPv6 includes four new protocols as part of the Neighbor Discovery Protocol
(ND or NDP).

Messaging between an IPv6 router and an IPv6 device, including dynamic address
allocation are as follows:
  - Router Solicitation (RS) message
  - Router Advertisement (RA) message

Messaging between IPv6 devices, including duplicate address detection and
address resolution are as follows:
  - Neighbor Solicitation (NS) message
  - Neighbor Advertisement (NA) message

ICMPv6 ND also includes the redirect message, which has a similar function to
the redirect message used in ICMPv4.

RA Message
RA messages are sent by IPv6-enabled routers every 200 seconds to provide
addressing information to IPv6-enabled hosts. The RA message can include
addressing information for the host such as the prefix, prefix length, DNS
address, and domain name. A host using Stateless Address Autoconfiguration
(SLAAC) will set its default gateway to the link-local address of the router
that sent the RA.

RS Message
An IPv6-enabled router will also send out an RA message in response to an RS
message. In the figure, PC1 sends a RS message to determine how to receive its
IPv6 address information dynamically.

NS Message
When a device is assigned a global IPv6 unicast or link-local unicast address,
it may perform duplicate address detection (DAD) to ensure that the IPv6 address
is unique. To check the uniqueness of an address, the device will send an NS
message with its own IPv6 address as the targeted IPv6 address, as shown in the
figure.

If another device on the network has this address, it will respond with an NA
message. This NA message will notify the sending device that the address is in
use. If a corresponding NA message is not returned within a certain amount of
time, the unicast address is unique and acceptable for use.

DAD is not required, but RFC 4861 recommends that DAD is performed on unicast
addresses.

NA Message
Address resolution is used when a device on the LAN knows the IPv6 unicast
address of a destination but does not know its Ethernet MAC address. To
determine the MAC address for the destination, the device will send an NS
message to the solicited node address. The message will include the known
(targeted) IPv6 address. The device that has the targeted IPv6 address will
respond with an NA message containing its Ethernet MAC address.

13.2
Ping is an IPv4 and IPv6 testing utility that uses ICMP echo request and echo
reply messages to test connectivity between hosts.

Ping has a timeout value for the reply. If a reply is not received within the
timeout, ping provides a message indicating that a response was not received.

Type of connectivity tests performed with ping include the following:
  - Pinging the local loopback
  - Pinging the default gateway
  - Pinging the remote host

Ping can be used to test the internal configuration of IPv4 or IPv6 on the local
host. To perform this test, ping the local loopback address of 127.0.0.1 for
IPv4 (::1 for IPv6). An error message indicates that TCP/IP is not operational
on the host.

You can also use ping to test the ability of a host to communicate on the local
network. This is generally done by pinging the IP address of the default gateway
of the host. A successful ping to the default gateway indicates that the host
and the router interface serving as the default gateway are both operational on
the local network.

Ping can also be used to test the ability of a local host to communicate across
an internetwork. The local host can ping an operational IPv4 host of a remote
network.

Many network administrators limit or prohibit the entry of ICMP messages into
the corporate network; therefore, the lack of a ping response could be due to
security restrictions.

Ping is used to test connectivity between two hosts but does not provide
information about the details of devices between the hosts. Traceroute (tracert)
is a utility that generates a list of hops that were successfully reached along
the path. This list can provide important verification and troubleshooting
information. If the data reaches the destination, then the trace lists the
interface of every router in the path between the hosts. If the data fails at
some hop along the way, the address of the last router that responded to the
trace can provide an indication of where the problem or security restrictions
are found.

RTT
Using traceroute provides round-trip time for each hop along the path and
indicates if a hop fails to respond. The round-trip time is the time a packet
takes to reach the remote host and for the response from the host to return. An
asterisk (*) is used to indicate a lost or unreplied packet.

This information can be used to locate a problematic router in the path or may
indicate that the router is configured not to reply. If the display shows high
response times or data losses from a particular hop, this is an indication that
the resources of the router or its connections may be stressed.

[Lab 13.2.6] <- 
[Lab 13.2.7] <- 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Primera clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8/9/2023 12:10:27 PM

Profesor: Omar Roa

Clases

Magistrales WebEx/M3 
  - Miércoles 12 - 14
  - Viernes   12 - 14

Grupos M2-101
  - Lunes 8 - 10
  - Lunes 8 - 10

En este curso se trata:
Redes teleinformáticas I
CCNA I -> NetAcad

Metodología 

Seguimiento teórico (English)
Seguimiento práctico 
3 Parciales
Final teórico (English)
Final práctico

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Segunda clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Semana 14 - 18: No hay sesiones magistrales

Cada estudiante 1 sesión lab

Lunes 14, 8 am: Grupo 2 A - L
Lunes 14, 10 am: Grupo 1 A - L
Miércoles 16, 12: Grupo 2 M - Z 
Viernes 18, 12: Grupo 1 M - Z

Me tocaría el viernes con el señor Felipe.

Lugar: M2 - 101

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tercera clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SSID: Academia T&T
Clave: UNAL4c4d

El sistema operativo de los switches es IOS -> Internetworking Operating System
heredado de UNIX

UNIX fue el primer OS que tenía capacidades de redes

Este sistema operativo tiene dos prompts ->
  Switch> guest - user
  Switch# root  - privileged

> enable -> Salta a modo privilegiado
# disable -> Regresa a modo invitado

Siempre que lleguemos a clase, haremos el proceso de limpieza: *
# show startup-config -> ideal: startup-config not present
# erase startup-config -> Limpiar configuración
# reload -> Renicia el equipo

- Cuando aparece More -
Enter -> una línea más
Space -> un pantallazo más
Otra tecla -> Aborta

Comandos:

1. Fecha/hora
Es importante configurar la fecha y hora para los temas de seguridad es muy
importante para re-construir cómo sucedió un ataque.
Estos equipos guardan logs y la marca de tiempo debe ser configurada
correctamente por esto

# show clock -> Muestra la hora actual.
UTC Mon Mar 1 1993: Fecha icónica en la que se hizo release

Ajustar zona horaria

Las configuraciones se hacen en submodos del modo privilegiado, como el submodo
configuración global

# configure terminal -> Pasar al submodo configuración global

(config)# clock timezone COT -5

(config)# exit -> Regresa a privilegiado

# clock set TIME MONTH DAY YEAR

2. Configurar un nombre al y demás equipo

(config)# hostname WORD -> This system's network name

Asegurar el modo privilegiado

3. Asegurar el modo privilegiado

(config)# enable password WORD -> En este curso usamos cisco o class

Esta contraseña ya no se usa porque se guarda en texto plano.

# show running-config -> Mostrar configuración

4. Contraseña segura del privilegiado

(config)# enable secret WORD -> class para esta clase

Si está password, se usa para entrar, si ambas están presente, solo te deja
pasar con secret

Algoritmos de cifrado
-5 MD5
-9 SCRYPT

Quitar las configuraciones mencionadas anteriormente
# nohostname
# noenable password
# noenable secret

5. Mensaje del día 
Para que no les den libertad en la corte

(config)# banner motd $Propiedad privada$

8/18/2023 5:13:38 PM
Salimos por la activación de una alarma a eso de las 13:30. Curiosamente se
trataba de una torta de cumpleaños. Dicen que al apagar la vela, el detector de
humo se activó y perdimos aproximadamente 30 minutos de clase.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cuarta clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wed Aug 23 12:02:06 2023
No ha iniciado la clase aún. Creo que tengo todo listo.

En el calenndario M se refiere a clases en WebEx.

Número de grupo: 8

Agregar dirección IP:

Switch:
  (config)# interface vlan 1
  (config if)# ip address 10.0.0.x 255.0.0.0
  (config if)# no shutdown

Router:
  (config)# interface g0/0/0
  (config if)# ip address 10.0.0.x 255.0.0.0
  (config if)# no shutdown

ping IP

TELNET -> Protocolo para configuraciones

(config)# line vty <0-97> -> Cantidad de personas que se pueden conectar
(config-line)# password WORD -> Para esta clase ciscovty
(config-line)# login
(config-line)# transport input telnet

Telnet se accede desde Putty

Configurar contraseña para conectarse por consola
(config-line)# line console 0
(config-line)# password ciscocon
(config-line)# login

Ambas contraseña están en texto plano en show running config

(config-line)# service password-encryption -> Encriptar contraseñas (débil)

#wr -> Guardar configuración
# copy running-config startup-config -> Guardar configuración

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Quinta clase
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mon Aug 28 10:11:40 2023

ping 8.8.8.8 -> Ping a Google.

En la Universidad bloquean servicios de streams y otros sitios que no cumplen
con el fin misional de la Universidad.

El firewall escanea y bloque paquetes.

tracert es un ping controlado.

tracert 8.8.8.8

ipvoid.com -> Herramientas de trazado y demás.

Explicación de uso de Wireshark e inspección de paquetes ICMP y ICPMv6.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sexta clase
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8/30/2023 11:54:10
Omar explica la calificación del curso en WebEx.

8/30/2023 12:29:57
Las telecomunicaciones se han inspirado en las conversaciones humanas. 

Participantes:
  -> Source
  -> Destination

Mensaje

Medio

Reglas

Comunicación unicast, es decir, uno a uno. 
Comunicación broadcast, es decir, de uno a todos. En español le llaman
  difusión.
Comunicación multicast, es decir, de uno a un grupo en particular. Por ejemplo,
  la televisión digital es un multicast. En el que el decodificador usa
  protocolos para unirse o desligarse de una conexión multicast.

El broadcast es ineficiente porque perturba en la red.

Los protocolos son las reglas de comunicación. Llegar a un acuerdo en estos fue
un proceso difícil.

ISO -> International Organization for Standardization

El modelo OSI intenta explicar cómo funcionan las telecomunicaciones y lo hace
  mediante un modelo de 7 capas.

  7. Capa de aplicación (programas)
  6. Presentación (ASCII, gif, png)
  5. Sesión (MySQL)
  4. Transporte
  3. Red
  2. Enlace de datos
  1. Física

En las capas 5 - 7 la información se llama data.

La información viaja en segmentos, los cuales están compuestos por un header y
un payload. Diferentes capas agregan diferentes encabezados.

Data -> Segment -> Packet -> Frame -> Bits 
5-7     4          3         2        1

La PDU se refiere al nombre de la información en cada paso.

Unidad de transmisión máxima (MTU) En Ethernet es 1500Bytes (Solo data)

El modelo OSI no se usa, es meramente de referencia y para explicaciones
  académicas
  
Se termina la sesión.
8/30/2023 13:30:52

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Séptima clase
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9/1/2023 12:22:49

El modelo que se usa en la vida real es el modelo TCP/IP, el cual consta solo
con 4 capas.

Modelo OSI comparado con el modelo TCP/IP

7. Capa de aplicación (programas)     | App         |
6. Presentación (ASCII, gif, png)     | App         |
5. Sesión (MySQL)                     | App         |
4. Transporte                         | Transporte  |
3. Red                                | Internet    |
2. Enlace de datos                    | Acceso a la |
1. Física                             |     red     |

En este curso se habla con un enfoque LAN, si se toca el tema de cable coaxial,
se refiere a conectar coaxial entre ordenadores.

4. Medios - Capa 1 Física
  - Cobre: Conductor barato desde las líneas telefónicas. Inició como un
    coaxial. 
    
    La instalación y el costo son atractivos. Sin embargo, la señal se
    degrada con interferiencias electromagnéticas y radiofrecuencias. 
    
    Baja velocidad, 10 Mbps máximo.

    Desconectaba otros usuario al conectar nuevos equipos a la red.

    Coaxial grueso: 10BASE5 (Thick) 500m máximo, luego un repetidor (elemento
    activo, dado que necesita una fuente de energía para repetir la señal).

    Coaxial delgado: 10BASE2 (Thin) 175m máximo, es más usuado para las
    computadoras al interior. 

    Las redes coaxiales salen del panorama por sus contras, por ello
    evolucionamos al pan trenzado, sin embargo, sigue siendo cobre. Tiene 8
    pines (Verde, Naranja, Café, Azul y sus tierra).

    El par trenzado tiene 4 canales, por lo que el ancho de banda
    aumenta. Dado que puede recibir y transmitir al mismo tiempo. Tiene una
    distancia máxima de 100m.
    10BASET -> Ethernet
    100BASETX -> FastEthernet
    1000BASET -> GigabitEthernet

    Un conductor lineal se convierte en una antena receptora de señales. *

    Los pares entre sí no se afectan, pero sí las frecuencias parásitas.
    EMI/RFI.

    El par trenzado inció en los 80 y hasta el día de hoy sigue siendo usado por
    sus ventajas.

    El par trenzado más sencillo lo llamamos UTP -> Unshielded twisted pair.
    Par trenzado recubierto STP, FTP -> Shielded twisted pair. Full, cables
    only.

    La pantalla o shield refleja las interferencias.

    Es mejor pasar a la fibra óptica que pasar a STP. *
    
  - Fibra
  - Wireless

A esta fecha 9/1/2023 13:16:40 Hay fibra desde el M2 hasta el M5.

Entender el half-duplex, full duplex, tx, rx la clase lamentablemente se cortó
cuando lo estaba explicando.

9/1/2023 13:21:08

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Octava clase
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9/5/2023 12:49:24

Fue ayer, no estuve en clase porque me tomé muy literal el horario en NetAcad,
sin embargo, lo que se hizo fue crimpear RJ45.

Hay dos estándares:
  - T568A
  - T568B
  
También hay cables straight-trough y crossover. Los straight-trough tienen la
particularidad de tener ambas terminaciones iguales, sin embargo, los crossover
no, se adaptan a las necesidades de transmisión y recepción de señales. Por
suerte el auto MDIX detecta cómo mandar las señales y donde está implementado no
hace falta crimpear el cable de una forma en particular. El estándar más usado
es el T568B.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Novena clase
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

En este capítulo se introduce la fibra. Donde se usa la luz para transmitir
información, una de las grandes ventajas es que no tiene los problemas
EMI/RFI. Además las distancias empiezan a ser de kilómetros. Sin embargo, es
costosa. La instalación es más compleja y crimpear el cable también.

La fibra tiene dos modalidades.
  - Monomodo: Solo viaja una haz de luz en la fibra. El cable es generalmente
    amarillo. Un láser emite el haz de luz, pero es muy costoso.
    
  - Multimodo: Viajan varios haces de luz en reflección, pero nunca se chocan.
    El cable es generalmente naranja, usa un LED y es más barata.
    (La más popular) [Más gruesa] {Menor distancia que la Monomodo}

La fibra tiene varios tipos de conectores.

La fibra no es negociable. A diferencia de los cables de cobre, donde puedes
conectar a interfaces de velocidad diferente y trabajará a la velocidad más
limitante.

La fibra trabaja Full Duplex.

Cualquier impureza en la fibra causaría que deje de funcionar.

El siguiente medio es el medio no guiado o medios inalámbricos.

Inició con la radio, pero era una transmisión unidireccional. Luego cada empresa
nuevamente inició a solucionar el problema de transmisión por su lado hasta que
llegó la estandarización de Alliance WiFi y IEE 802.11 LAN o WLAN en el año
1997.

En ese entonces la frecuencia usada era 2.4GHz con una banda ancha de 2Mbps, era
poco atractivo debido a su velocidad, por lo que la IEEE empezó a anexar.
1 - Legacy 1997 2.4Ghz 2Mbps.
  
2 - Anexo a 1999 -> 802.11a: 5Ghz 54Mbps. Le custa superar obstáculos, pero va a
    más velocidad.
    
2 - Anexo b 1999 -> 802.11b: 2.4Ghz 11Mbps. Supera obstáculos con más
    facilidad, pero es más lenta.

3 - Anexo g 2003 -> 2.4Ghz 54Mbps. Esta tomó lo mejor de las anteriores.

4 - Anexo n 2009 -> 2.4Ghz/5Ghz. 600Mbps. Debe tener 4 antenas, cada antena de
    aproximadamente 150.

5 - Anexo ac 2013 -> 5Ghz. 1.3Gbps. Se hizo tan popular el 2.4Ghz que se saturó.

6 - Anexo ax 2020 -> 2.4Ghz/5Ghz. 9Gbps. El famoso Wi-Fi 6.

Las frecuencias pertenecen al estado. En Colombia es la Agencia Nacional del
Espectro, estos se encargan de licenciar las frecuencias y cobrar a las
entidades que las usan.

Las redes 3G, 4G, 5G, emisoras de radio, canales de televisión usan estas
frecuencias y deben pagar por su uso. La excepción es 2.4Ghz y 5Ghz, dado que no
son licenciadas.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima clase
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9/8/2023 12:16:38

Access point -> Es una especie de HUB

Cisco vendía la WPC300N, esta trae GUI. 

Asociar W en PT a b/g, es decir 2.4GHz.

SSID -> Nombre de la red.
Auth -> Contraseña (seguridad)

802.3 -> Ethernet standard.

Capa 2, Data Link, Enlace de datos. => Control de acceso, tiene control de
errores.

Capa 2 Lan protocolos -> Ethernet, WLAN, Token Ring, Fool.
Capa 2 WAN protocolos -> PPP, MPLS, HDLC, FrameRelay, ATM.

Topologías LAN

Bus -> Dejo de usarse porque es poco atractivo desconectar otros usuarios al
escalar.

Estrella -> Se queda sin conexión si el centro falla.

Anillo -> Dejó de usarse porque un fallo deja la topología sin internet.

Topologías WAN

P2P -> Conexión entre dos WAN
Hub & Spoke | Malla parcial -> Conexión entre varias WAN.
Mesh | Malla completa -> Conexión con todos.

Formas de hablar en redes.

Determinística | por turnos:
  - Token: Recuerda token ring, tecnología de IBM, topología en anillo y
    necesitaba dos tarjetas.
    
  - FDDI: Usaba fibra y necesita dos tarjetas de fibra.

No determinístico | Contienda
  - Ethernet: Escucho, si el medio está ocupado, espero, si el medio está libre,
    envío.
    
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima primera clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mon Sep 11 09:58:53 2023

El sistema decimal nació de la anatomía del ser humano. (sin fuente)
El binario podía ser usado en Morse. Se representa 2# o binario_{2}
El hexadecimal nació por la computación. Se representa 0x.

ipconfig -> 
ipconfig/all ->
nslookup address ->

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima segunda clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
WebEx
9/13/2023 12:06:40

Ethernet es de los más populares. Nación en Hawaii.

LLC y MAC son las subdivisiones de la capa 2.
Si cambia la capa física, cambia el MAC, si cambia la capa 3, la que cambia es
la LLC.

Norma MAC: 802.3
Norma LLC: 802.2

OUI -> Primeros 24 bits de la MAC, puede ser constante por proveedor.

Todos F en la MAC implica broadcast.

Los frames tienen:
  - Header
    - DST MAC
    - SRC MAC
    - Type/L => MTU: 0x05dc, tipo => 0x800, 0x0806, 0x0842
  - payload
    - Mayor a 46 y menor a 1500
  - Trailer
    FCS => Frame Checksum
    CRC-4 => Suma polinomica

Recuerda que antes hay un preambulo que prepara al dispositivo para escuchar.

En entornos más seguros se usa md5, SHA1, lo cual tiene sumas únicas.

El HUB es un loro que solo repite.
el Switch entiende las tramas y toma decisiones.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima tercera clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

El switch solo maneja la capa 2.

#show ip interface brief -> Inventario de interfaces
#show interface fa0/1 o gi1/0/1 -> Checkear MAC

Cuando se hace ping a un switch, la MAC es la de vlan1

El switch construye la tabla MAC, la cual asocia puerto con MAC

#show mac address-table

Eth -> dst, src
ip -> src, dst

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima cuarta clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wed 27 Sep 2023 11:57:26 AM -05

Ya hay examen de los capítulos 4 - 7. Hasta el domingo primero.

El hub es un dispositivo de capa 1, de modo que solo ve voltaje.
El concentrador replica la señal por todos los puertos exceptuando el puerto por
el que lo recibió. El hub además usa un ancho de banda compartido, entre más
dispostivos, más ancho de banda se consume. Los hub hacen unicasts sucesivos, no
broadcast, a esto se le llama flood. Los hubs usan half-duplex. Las colisiones
son comúnes en los hubs.

La portadora es figurarse cuando hay una bajada en voltaje para permitir o otro
dispositivo hablar. 
CSMA/XX => Carrier Sense multiple access, censado de portadora.
XXXX/CD => Collision detection. Cuando llegan señales extrañas que no se pueden
entender. Se hace un back-off con un tiempo determinado a cada computador para
escuchar otra vez.

Switches tienen buffers cuando reciben paquetes al tiempo.

Construcción de la tabla MAC:
SRC - aprende dirección de source
DST - decide, si no la tiene, hace un flooding, el cual es unicast para cada
port.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima quinta clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fri 29 Sep 2023 12:13:27 PM -05

Parcial 2: ipv4, 12 + 1 October
parcial 3: ipv6, November.

Hasta entonces hemos visto hasta capa 2, construyendo LANs, donde los equipos
estrella son switches. Hasta ahora solo nos podemos comunicar en el mismo
segmento, si quiero comunicarme con otra LAN, necesitamos routers y capa 3.

Capa 2: switching
Capa 3: routing

Tareas de la capa 3:
  - Seleccionar la mejor ruta. Basado en métricas.
  - Comunicar diferentes segmentos.

El router segmenta las redes.

Al principio existía un protocoloj 

¿Por qué nos quedamos con Ethernet? Por su modularidad. LLC, MAC.

IPX Novell 
AppleTalk
IP DoD

¿Por qué nace IP? IP era un sistema de comunicaciones redundantes interesante
usado por espías. Pronto después se decidió implementar IP en la industria. Por
ende, se empezó a producir equipos usando IP, IPX Novell y Appletalk perdieron
fuerza por esto.

Data, voz, vídeo -> Se usa IP.

IP entró en crisis en los años en los años 90. En lugar de hacer un protocolo
nuevo, se desarrolló IPv6 a partir del conocimiento que se tenía de IPv4.

IP -> Nombre inicialmente.
IPv4 -> Nombre para diferenciar de IPv6.

El Ipv6 nació en el 99.

IPv5 era un protocolo de multimedia ya registrado, pero no fue popular.

El ID de IPv4 tiene 32 bits.

El ID de IPv6 tiene 128 bits. 4 octetos. 32 hex. 8 hextetos hexadecimales
separados por 2 puntos.

Network -> Grupo
Host -> Individuo 

La máscara de red te dice cuáles son de red (network) y cuáles son de host.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima sexta clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mon Oct  2 09:58:34 2023

Clase A: Grandes.

Primer octeto: 0 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ : minimo: 0, maximo: 127.
Cualquier segmento de red entre 0 y 127 es clase A, para grandes segmentos de
redes.

R.H.H.H -> red.host.host.host

Máscara.
11111111.00000000.00000000.00000000
255.0.0.0 o /8 al todos los tales ser 8.

De esto podemos tener 128 redes 0-128.H.H.H, sin embargo, no usamos 2.
0.0.0.0 -> Cuando el dispositivo no pertenece a una red.
127.0.0.1 -> (loopback) para debuggear el NIC. El famoso localhost.

Hay 16777216 direcciones por cada Clase A.
Excepto por 
H = 0, Red: 10.0.0.0 -> Para hacer reglas de segmento.
H = 1, Broadcast: 10.255.255.255 -> Broadcast.

Clase B: Mediana

Primer Octeto: 10 _ _ _ _ _ _
Máscara. R.R.H.H
Máscara binarios: 11111111.11111111.00000000.0000000
Máscara decimales: 255.255.0.0 o /16
Cantidad de redes: 2^14 = 16384
Cantidad de host: 2^16 = 65534 - 2 porque siempre hay dos redes que no usamos.
Host y redes combinatoria: 1073709056

Clase C: pequeña
110 _ _ _ _ _
Máscara R.R.R.H
Máscara binario: 255.255.255.0 o /24
Redes: 2097152
Host por red: 254
Combinatoria: 532676608

Clase D: direcciones multicast (grupos)
224-239

Clase E: 240-255 Experimental.
Broadcast de una sola red *.*.*.255
Broadcast de broadcast 255.255.255.255

El router parte las redes en diferentes

Default gateway => Equipo L3, pertencer al mismo segmento.

poner default gateway en el switch
#ip default gateway [ip]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima séptima clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Esperando que Omar inicie la sesión
Wed 04 Oct 2023 12:03:30 PM -05

En el parcial dos: trabajaremos ipv4. [8 - 13]
  1. FLSM
  2. VLSM
  3. Misceláneos.
  
Fecha parcial: Viernes 13.

ARP (Address resolution protocol): Protocolo capa 2, pero lleva información de
la capa 3. =>[header][data capa 3][trailer]. Encuentra la MAC dada una IP.

ARP envía un broadcast preguntando por la ip de destino, si está en la misma
red, la dirección de destino responde por unicast.

Consultar tabla arp en Windows.
$ arp -a

Tabla MAC
Relaciona capa 1 con capa 2, mappea puerto a MAC, esto está en los equipos
intermedios o switches.

Tabla Cache ARP
Relaciona capa 2 y la capa 3, mappea MAC a IP, la construyen los extremos o los
hosts

Borrar tabla arp en Windows.
$ arp -d

ARP - Local
Dispositivo orígen: Who has IP destination?
Destination answers: MAC destination.

Los routers son un muro de contención de broadcast.
ARP - Remota
Se envía al default gateway luego de comprobar que la IP no está en la misma
red.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima octava clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fri 06 Oct 2023 11:55:35 AM -05

Subredes

Nadie iba a pagar por 16 millones de direcciones hablando de la clase A, por
ende se convirtió en una papa caliente.

A finales de los 80s llegó el módem a las casas.

La división se hace en potencias de 2.

A veces se le puede hacer subnetting a las subnetting.

Hay dos métodos de subredes, cuando no se había agotado completamente las
direcciones, el FLSM - Fixed Length Subnet Mask. 
  - En el FLSM el tamaño de la subnet no varía.
  - En el FLSM es importante el número de grupos.
  - Se desperdician muchas direcciones con el FLSM.

El otro método es VLSM - Variable Length Subnet Mask.
  - El tamaño es variable.
  - Las direcciones se desperdician menos.
  - Es importante el número de hosts.

En redes privadas, FLSM, donde no cobran por las direcciones, pero en entornos
públicos, donde cobran por las direcciones, usar VLSM.

La empresa ABC requiere implementar un esquema de direcciones IPv4, utilizará la
dirección 10.0.0.0/8 para atender sus instalaciones. La empresa tiene las
siguientes características, tenemos una sede en Bogotá que requiere 12K
estaciones de trabajo (hosts), una sede en Medellín que necesita 6K hosts, una
sede en Cali que requiere 1K hosts, una sede en Bucaramanga que requiere 3.5
hosts, Barranquilla requiere 200 hosts, San Andrés 31 hosts, Villavicencio 100
hosts, Pasto 80 hosts.

- Bogotá: 12K
- Medellín 6K
- Cali 1K
- Bucaramanga 3.5K
- Barranquilla 200
- San Andrés 31
- Villavicencio 100
- Pasto 81

Pérdida

Bogotá: 2085150
Medellín: 2091150
Cali: 2096150
Bucaramanga: 2093650
Barranquilla: 2096950
San Andrés: 2097119
Villavicencio: 2097050
Pasto: 2097069

FLSM
Número de grupos: 8
2^X >= grupos, Fórmula de diseño.
X bits para hacer las 8 combinaciones.

[R][H][H][H]
255.0.0.0 /8

Pasa a ser

[R][S|H][H][H]
255.224.0.0 /11

   RED        HOST                     BROADCAST
S1 10.0.0.0   10.0.0.1 - 10.31.255.254 10.31.255.255
S2 10.32.0.0                           10.63.255.255
S3 10.64.0.0                           10.95.255.255
S4 10.96.0.0
S5 10.128.0.0
S6 10.160.0.0
S7 10.192.0.0
S8 10.224.0.0                          10.255.255.255

VLSM
2^Y-2 >= Hosts

[R][H][H][H]
[R][S][S, 2|H, 6][H]/28 -> Bogotá
[R][S][S][S, 1][H]/25 -> Villavicencio

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Décima novena clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mon Oct  9 09:54:58 2023
Waiting...

Mon Oct  9 10:14:09 2023
VLSM es basado en hosts y la forma de diseño es 2^y - 2 >= hosts.

Yo tengo 100 hosts, la potencia de 2 que podría cubrir esto es de 128, pero si
se tiene estimado un crecimiento de 50%, entonces necesita usar la potencia
256.

Este método necesita ser de mayor a menor.

12000
6000
3500
1000
200
100
80
31

Demanda
12000
6000
3500
1000
200
100
80
31

y
14
13
12
10
8
7
7
6

Mask | Network id         |      Hosts       | Broadcasts
18   | 10.0.0.0/18        | 0.1 - 63.254     | 63.255
19   | 10.0.64.0/19       | 64.1 - 95.254    | 95.255
20   | 10.0.96.0/20       | 96.1 - 111.254   | 111.255
22   | 10.0.112.0/22      | 112.1 - 115.254  | 115.255
24   | 10.0.116.0/24      |     ...          | 116.255
25   | 10.0.0.117.0/25    |     ...          | 117.127
25   | 10.0.0.117.128/25  |     ...          | 117.255
26   | 10.0.0.118.0/25    |     ...          | 118.163

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
vigésima clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Esperando que Omar entre a la reunión
Wed 11 Oct 2023 11:56:32 AM -05

Explicando cómo obtener carajadas.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
vigésima primera clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wed 18 Oct 2023 12:14:15 PM -05

128 bits => 2^128 combinaciones.

8 Cuartetos hex:
HHHH:HHHH:HHHH:HHHH:HHHH:HHHH:HHHH:HHHH:

Prefijo, antes llamado red.

Interface ID, antes llamado host.

Ya no se llama máscara, ahora se llama longitud prejijo y siempre se representa
en formato slash.

Cuarteto hexadecimal o hextetos.

Reglas para reducir las direcciones ipv6
Es importante recordar que esto es escritura y no representa lo que se envía.

:0000: -> :0: 

0's a la izq
2800:0:0:5ce:0:0:0:0:9

continuos 0's => ::
a. 2800::5ce:0:0:0:9
b 2800:0:0:5ce::9

Siempre validar que la dirección tenga 8 hextetos.

Si Windows tiene ambas opciones, usa IPv6.

IPv4 y IPv6 son paralelos, pero no se mezclan.

Tipos de direcciones IPv6

Ámbito, Cobertura, Área de acción.

1. Link-Local Address (LLA)
  - Segmento local.
  - Dirección built-in, todos los equipos lo tienen.
  - Patrón: fe80::/10 => fe[10|00] => fe8, fe9, fea, feb.

2. ULA. Unique Local Address.
  - No navega en internet. (ip privada en IPv4)
  - No sale a internet.
  - Patrón: fc00::/7 => fe[110|0] => fc, fd son ULA.

Hay direcciones IPv6 globales.

3. Globales
  - Patrón: 2000::/3 => [001|0] => 2, 3 son globales.

4. Multicast
  - FF00::/8
  
5. Loopback
  - ::1
  
6. Sin dirección.
  - ::
  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
vigésima segunda clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/20/2023 12:10:37

Subnetting en IPv6, a pesar de tener muchas direcciones IPv6, es mejor tener
grupos para controlarla a través de reglas.

Subnetting is supposedly easy and for what I can see... I guess so.

Ahora vamos a mirar por qué se recomienda /64

[Prefijo]|[ID] <- Le caben 18 trillones de dispositivos.
         |64

El método EUI-64 funciona si el dispositivo tiene una dirección /64, le entregas
el prefijo y cada maquina se asigna el ID.

Parto en mitades la MAC

[mitad1] [FFFE] [mitad2]

Invertir el séptimo bit más significativo

(config)# ipv6 unicast-routing -> Activar ipv6
(config)# interface [] -> Entrar a la configuración de interfaz
(coinfg-if)# ipv6 enable -> Activar ipv6

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
vigésima tercera clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mon Oct 23 09:52:36 2023
Link local es solo para comunicarse en local

(config)#ipv6 unicast-routing
#show ipv6 inteface brief
(config)# int g0/0, g0/1
(config-if)# ipv6 address [ip-address]
(config-if)# no shutdown

En ipv6 un dispositivo puede tener varias interfaces sin ningún problema.

Microsoft no usa EWi64, tiene un método. Se puede desactivar y usar el el
Ewi64.

Acostumbramos que los equipos de infrastructuras tengan direcciones más
sencillas.

(config-i)#ipv6 address fe80::1 link-local

Gua -> Direciones globales que nos da el proveedor y por ellas pagamos.

Las direcciones globales generalmente inician con 2 o 3.
Generalmente no se ve la ULA porque la gente pide la direccion de internete y
lo usan para ambas cosas.

(config-if)no ipv6 address [] => Eliminar ipv6 address.

En casos en los que la dirección del PC es muy larga y queremos una más
reducida, debemos configurarla manualmente desde el PC.

La mejor práctica para el default gateway es poner la link local del router.

No todos los switches soportan ipv6 y es necesario activarlo
#int vlan 1 address
(config-if)#no shutdown

(config)# sdm prefer dual-ipv4-and-ipv6 default
#wr
#reload -> Habilitar ipv6 en los switches que no lo soportan.

En los routers nos centrabamos en las gigas o en la fast, en el switch nos
metemos en la vlan 1.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
vigésima cuarta clase
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Esperando a Omar...
10/25/2023 12:01:26

Llegó
10/25/2023 12:10:05

Estábamos revisando temas de IPv6, hicimos subnetting, vimos cómo se asignan las
direcciones en los laboratorios. Ahora vamos a hablar de cosas invisibles que
están en el medio y nos ayudan a usarlo sin dificultades, primero vamos a
conversar acerca de ARP.

En IPv4 usamos el prtocolo ARP para mappear ip a MAC, usando el broadcast.

IPv6 is no different. Pero, ARP no puede ayudarnos porque en IPv6 no hay
broadcasts.

Recurrimos al protocolo ICMPv6 para que haga esa labor. ICMPv6 hace se pone
diferentes camisetas para hacer funciones diferentes.

ICMPv6 utiliza una herramienta para hacer el descubrimiento llamado NDP Neighbor
Discovery Protocol, este utiliza mensajes ICMPv6 para descubrir la MAC.

Neighbor Solicitation (NS)

Neighbor Advertisement (NA)

El orign de NS es la link local, siempre se usará la link local para este
mensaje. Porque es una dirección que todos tiene para trabajar en IPV6.

El mensaje acotado se llama dirección de nodo solicitado, esto solo la entienden
los que tienen cierto parámetro final, solo lo van a procesar los que terminan
en ese. La dirección de nodo solicitado se construye de la siguiente manera:
FF02:0:0:0:0:1:FF__: este es el patrón que se usa y se agregan los últimos bits
de la dirección que se quiere consultar.

Tabla de vecinos, show neighbor.

IGMP, grupos para que nos floodeen los puertos.

Conectividad -> ping, echo request(128 0x80), echo reply(129 0x81). [Unicast]

Mappeo IPv6-MAC -> NDP, NS(135 0x87), NA(136 0x88). [Multicast]

Los hosts piden el prefijo con Router Solicitation(133) y Router Advertisement
(134), usa multicast.
